Biographical Note Dale R. Broadhurst (b. 1947) was born in Boise, Idaho and grew up in Idaho Falls. A member of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS), renamed the Community of Christ in 2001, Broadhurst has a keen interest in the origins of the Mormon Church and the Book of Mormon itself. While working on his Masters degree in Christian Education at the Methodist Theological School in Delaware, Ohio, Broadhurst did extensive research on the correlation between the Book of Mormon, published in 1830 by Joseph Smith, Jr., and a manuscript of epic American fiction composed by Solomon Spalding (1761-1816). This longstanding but not generally accepted theory that Smith plagiarized some of Spalding's work has been pursued by select groups since the early 1830s. After completing his Masters degree in 1982 and dedicating many years to educational volunteer work in Asia and the Pacific, Dale Broadhurst retired to Hilo, Hawaii, where he lives with his wife, Elizabeth.
Historical Note Founded in 1979 by Andy Bostinto, the National Gym Association (NGA) is a non-profit organization whose mission is "to inform and support athletes through education, personal fitness training and certification programs" and to encourage "the art and science of natural strength training and bodybuilding." The NGA has supported "all natural" (drug free) professional and amateur bodybuilding competitions across the United States of America since the 1980s. Blair Dean has been a promoter of these competitions in Utah for over thirty-five years.
Biographical Note Peter Edward Gibbs (b. 1943) was born on October 16 in Salt Lake City, Utah and graduated from the University of Utah with a Doctor of Philosophy degree (PhD) in mechanical engineering in 1971. As a young man he and his brother, Chalrles, developed Gibbs Ascender, the mechanical replacement for the prussik knot and an aid for climbers, spelunkers, arborists and rescue workers. An outdoor enthusiast, Gibbs has acquired vast knowledge of recreational sports and their histories through his adventures in climbing, caving, sea kayaking, ski touring, and forty years of commercial river running. He is the author of Off Track In Colombia: A Tale of Action, Adventure, and Passion.
Organizational History The town of Park City sprung up in Utah's Wasatch Mountains after army prospectors discovered silver in the area in 1868. Early miners used primitive skis and snowshoes as transporation to the mines, and skiing emerged a recreational activity by the 1920s. Scandinavian miners held jumping tournaments on the Creole Mine dump (now the Creole ski run to the Town Lift), and the newly formed Park City Ski Club conducted guided ski tours on the hills that make up the modern resort. As the area's silver mining industry faded away in the mid 20th century, the town's last surviving mining company, United Park City Mines, received a federal loan to help revive conomically depressed rural towns and opened the city's first ski area, Treasure Mountain Resort, in 1963. For its first four years of operation the resort featured the Skier's Subway lift, which carried skiers in modified mining trolleys two and a half miles through the pitch dark Spiro Tunnel to the Thaynes Hoist, where they boarded the old mine elevator and were lifted 1,750 feet to the surface near the Thaynes chair lift. Treasure Mountain changed its name to Park City Ski Area in 1966 and to Park City Mountain Resort in 1996. Its sister ski resort, Park City West (later Wolf Mountain; now The Canyons) opened in 1968, and nearby Deer Valley opened in 1981. Park City hosted its first World Cup ski race in 1986. During the 2002 Winter Olympic Games hosted by Salt Lake City, Park City Mountain Resort hosted the men's and women's giant slalom, men's and women's snowboarding parallel giant slalom, and both men's and women's snowboarding halfpipe events.
Biographical / Historical Note Athol Graham (1924-1960) was a Salt Lake City mechanic who attempted to break the land speed record at the Bonneville Salt Flats. Graham built his own car, the City of Salt Lake, using an airplane engine and cockpit. Although Graham neared Sir John Cobb's 394.2 mph record (set in 1947) in December 1959 with a run of 344.7, his final attempt in Summer 1960 ended in the first fatal crash at the Bonneville Salt Flats. The first land speed record was set at the Bonneville Salt Flats in 1914 by Teddy Tetzlaff. The slick surface of the flats, created by the presence liquefied salt, facilitates greater speeds, however, it does not offer much traction, creating a substantial danger to the drivers. Due to recent mining of the salt on these flats, they have begun to disappear. Graham, a native of Salt Lake City, quit his job as a mechanic in 1955 and opened his own garage (Canyon Motors) on 3300 South to spend more time pursuing his dream of hurtling down the Bonneville Salt Flats at more than 400 mph. Graham spent $2,000 on his homemade speed machine in an era when Mickey Thompson of California, the American land speed record holder, spent $190,000 on his record holding automobile. In December 1959, Graham hurtled out of nowhere in the City of Salt Lake to nearly upset Thompson's record. Graham was also a veteran of World War II, having served in England and France as a mechanic. Following the war, Graham went overseas to New Zealand as a missionary for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints from 1947 to 1949. Graham married his wife, Zeldine, on August 2, 1950. He passed away one day prior to their tenth wedding anniversary. At the time of his death, Athol and Zeldine Graham had four children. Athol Graham's second youngest child, Daryl "Butch" Graham, was three years old when his father died. In commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of Athol Graham's attempt on the land speed record and subsequent death, Butch rebuilt the car that took his father to his death, the scarlet City of Salt Lake.
Biographical Note Malcom 'Moki Mac' Ellingson was a prominent figure in Utah's river running community in the mid twentieth century. Boy Scout leader and river guide, Ellingson earned his nickname from his knowledge about the Moqui, prehistoric inhabitants of the Colorado Plateau and its river canyons. Ellingson partnered with Albert Quist in the early years of his river expedition company. Today Quist's children operate Moki Mac River Expeditions, named in his honor.
Organizational History Mountain Fuel Supply Company began life in 1928 as the oil and gas exploration and production division of Western Public Service Corporation, a Salt Lake City holding company which served the Salt Lake Valley with natural gas from northern Utah and southwestern Wyoming. In 1935 shareholders consolidated Western Public Service Corporation into a single company called Mountain Fuel Supply Company. Shareholders returned to the holding company structure in 1984 and reorganized the company to form Questar Corporation.
Biographiocal Note Lila Eccles Brimhall (1892-1980) was born November 26 in Ogden, Utah to Bertha Marie Jensen Eccles and her husband, David Eccles, who held half-ownership in the Ogden Opera House, where young Lila was exposed to the world of theater. In 1914, Lila Eccles received a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Utah, where she studied under Maud May Babcock in the speech department. She went on to receive a diploma from the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York City in 1916 and a certificate from the same institution in 1929. After marrying Dean R. Brimhall, future Director of Research form the Civil Aeronautics Administration, in 1917, Lila Brimhall, nee Eccles, continued her studies at Columbia University (1917, 1933, 1941), the University of London (1937) and earned her Master of Arts degree from the University of Southern California in 1939. Always returning to her native Utah, Lila Eccles Brimhall served as a member of faculty at the University of Utah as a speech instructor (1929-31), assistant professor (1948-1955) and associate professor in speech and theater (1956-1960). After retiring to emeritus status, she held the positions of associate professor emeritus in speech (1930-1980) and associate professor emeritus in theater (1967-1980). Having performed with the University of Utah Players, Moroni Olsen Players, California's Pasadena Players, and in various theatrical productions in the Salt Lake City area in addition to her many lectures and speeches, Lila Eccles Brimhall now watches over the lobby of the Pioneer Memorial Theatre via a 1977 portrait by Alvin Gittins. She died in Salt Lake City on April 3, 1980.
Historical Note The Multimedia Archives contain the non-textual archives of the Special Collections Department of the J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah. The holdings are divided into two sections: the Photographs and the Audio-Visual materials. The Photograph Archive houses over 1300 separate photograph collections, which together contain approximately 1.7 million photographs representing almost all historic formats such as daguerreotypes, tintypes, cartes-de-viste, ambrotypes, albumen prints, panoramas, and cyanotypes, as well as more modern color and black and white prints, transparencies, and negatives. The Audio-Visual Archive contains over 900 collections and includes; audio cassettes, reel-to-reel tapes, vinyl recording discs, VHS, 8mm, Super-8, 16mm, and 35mm film and more.
Historical Note During the decline in silver mining in the town of Alta, Utah in the early twentieth century, the United States Forest Service employed world champion skier Alf Engen to invesigate the area as a winter sports site and, on his recommendation, the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) planted hunderds of trees to replenish the area's deforested slopes. In 1937 mining deed owners George Watson and William O'Connor eased their tax burden by donating 1600 acres of surface rights to the United States Forest Service for use as a ski area. The ski area opened in 1938, and the Alta Lodge and Collins chairlift began operations in 1939. The 1940s saw the opening of the Rustler (1947) and Peruvian lodges (1948), the origin of the Alta Ski Patrol, the opening of a center for avalanche research, and the training of Company B, 503 Parachute Battalion for service in World War II. Margie of the Wasatch was filmed during this era of early growth.
Biographical Note Born in 1911 to Joseph Stras Peery and Julina Clarissa Smith, Dr. Joseph Smith Peery pursued a long life of travel and study. He received his undergraduate at the University of Utah with honors, followed by his doctorate from Northwestern University. From 1974-1976, he was the Dean of the College of Business at the University of Utah. He was a professor of finance and economics, earning multiple awards like the Brady Superior Teaching Award in 1992. His work as a businessman began early on when he opened his own store, Seagull Drug, when he was 26. Over the years, he was a strong force in the business world including establishing an MBA program with the United States Air Force in Europe. Peery was one of 9 children to Joseph Stras Peery. He had six sisters, Luacine, Julina, Elizabeth or Betty, Margaret, Nancy, and Jeanne. He had two brothers David and Paul. Many of the siblings can be seen together at varying ages in the first 8 parts of this finding aide along with his father, mother, and then stepmother years after Joseph Smith Peery’s mother’s death. The later films show Fern, Joseph’s wife and mother of Teri and Tana. There is also footage of Peery’s son as well as Fern’s sons from previous marriages. Mainly the footage is of family gatherings and trips with his daughters, Teri and Tana. Beyond his academic life, Peery spent a lot of time traveling. He was one of the first men to run the middle fork of the Salmon River. Many of the films in this collection include footage from around the world as he traveled first as a young man, and then later with Tana and Teri as well as his wife Fern. From New York in the 1930s to London in the 1960s, Peery documented all of these momentous events in his life which are now this collection of audio and visual works.
Historical Note The Green River, located in the western United States, is the chief tributary of the Colorado River. The watershed of the river, known as the Green River Basin, covers parts of Wyoming, Utah, and Colorado. The Green River is 730 miles (1,170 km) long, beginning in the Wind River Mountains of Wyoming and flowing through Wyoming and Utah for most of its course, except for 40 miles (64 km) into western Colorado John Wesley Powell (March 24, 1834 – September 23, 1902) was a U.S. soldier, geologist, explorer of the American West, professor at Illinois State University, and director of major scientific and cultural institutions. He is famous for the 1869 Powell Geographic Expedition, a three-month river trip down the Green and Colorado rivers that included the first known passage through the Grand Canyon.
Biographical Note Diane Orr is a documentary filmmaker and photographer whose films have explored subjects including Iadho's 1961 SL-1 nuclear reactor accident, the 1976 Teton Dam disaster and the 1973 standoff at Wounded Knee, South Dakota. Several of Orr's films document the culture and history of the American West and the issues facing Native Americans. Her photography highlights Western landscapes and rock art (pictographs and petroglyphs).
Historical Note With the controversy over the planned Echo Park Dam in Dinosaur National Monument in the late 1940s and early 1950s, many people like Andrew Pfeiffenberger turned to Bus Hatch and his sons, Don, Ted, and Frank, to take them down the Green and Yampa Rivers. During the controversy, Hatch River Expeditions outfitted river trips for both pro-dam and anti-dam groups, trips that often included over 100 people. This was the true genesis of Hatch River Expedtions. After the controversy, and through the 1960s, the name Hatch became synonymous with river running, especially in the western United States. By the end of the 20th century, Hatch had become one of the best-known river outfitters in existence, and there are now 3rd generation members of the Hatch family who are still in the river running business.
Biographical Note Dr. Maxwell Myer Wintrobe (1901-1986) was born October 27 in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada to Eastern European immigrants. He studied at the University of Manitoba where he earned Bachelor of Arts (BA-1921), Doctor of Medicine (MD-1926) and Bachelor of Science in Medicine (BS-1927) degrees. He married Rebecca Zanphir in 1928. After spending time as an intern at the Winnipeg General Hospital and a fellow at his alma mater, Wintrobe joined the faculty of Tulane University where he invented the Wintrobe hematocrit, an accurate technique for measuring red blood cells. He earned a Ph.D. there in 1929. Having served on the faculty at Johns Hopkins from 1930-1943, Dr. Wintrobe relocated to Salt Lake City as professor of internal medicine and head of the department of medicine at the University of Utah where, with Dr. George E. Cartwright, he conducted research in hereditary and metabolic diseases and cardiovascular medicine and built and supervised a hematology training program. In the 1980s, he was instrumental in the development of the Quantitative Buffy Coat (QBC) blood testing technique. An influential hematologist and author of the authoritative textbook, Clinical Hematology, Dr. Wintrobe eventually became chief consultant in medicine to the Veteran's Administration Hospital in Salt Lake City and Director of the university's Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute as well. He passed away in 1986.
Organizational History Robert Rafael "Bus" Hatch and his brothers Alton and Tom began boating in the Vernal, Utah, area in the late 1920s. They ran the Green River in 1931, the Green and Colorado through Cataract Canyon in 1933, and the Grand Canyon in 1934. In 1935-36, they ran the Middle Fork of the Salmon River in Idaho, as well as the Main Salmon. By the end of World War II, Bus Hatch in particular had become known as a river runner. With the controversy over the planned Echo Park Dam in Dinosaur National Monument in the late 1940s and early 1950s, many people turned to Bus Hatch and his sons, Don, Ted, and Frank, to take them down the Green and Yampa Rivers. During the controversy, Hatch River Expeditions outfitted river trips for both pro-dam and anti-dam groups, trips that often included over 100 people. This was the true genesis of Hatch River Expedtions. After the controversy, and through the 1960s, the name Hatch became synonymous with river running, especially in the western United States. By the end of the 20th century, Hatch had become one of the best-known river outfitters in existence, and there are now 3rd generation members of the Hatch family who are still in the river running business.
Organizational History In 1983, the National Endowment for the Humanities awarded a major grant to the National Extension Homemakers Council (NEHC) for a three-year nationwide project to collect, process, and disseminate representative oral histories from rural homemakers throughout the country. The council is a national nonprofit educational organization made up of 30,000 organized groups (or clubs) in forty-four states and two territories, with a membership of approximately 500,000. It is one of the largest women's organizations in the country with a predominantly rural and small town membership. The clubs which comprise the NEHC are the audience groups of the Home Economics Division of the Cooperative Extension Service. Typically, these clubs meet monthly or semi-monthly for educational programming in the areas of home economics and community service. The project, called "Voices of American Homemakers," combined an extensive volunteer effort with careful attention directed to the professional canons of oral history practice. Professional historians guided the effort by offering substantive perspectives on women's history and technical counsel on oral history. Under the terms of the grant, one complete set of project tapes and associated materials were to be presented to one repository in each state at no cost to the institution. The primary product of the effort was a collection of 203 oral histories. In the final edited and transcribed version there are 196 interviews by women from thirty-six states. Typically they describe homemaking, child rearing, and family management in the small towns or rural areas where they live. A seminar was held during the National Conference of Extension Homemaker's Council in 1983. It featured authorities in the fields of oral history and women's studies who presented papers based on material extracted from the tapes. Following each of the presentations, an audience of over 200 homemakers participated in discussion of the points raised in each paper. A slide/sound program was produced in 1984, using photographs and excerpts from the taped interviews. Finally, in 1985 a book was written based on material gathered from the project. Titled Voices of American Homemakers, it proved to be well received and has been reprinted. A copy of the book has been placed in the Special Collections Western Americana Department. The final dissemination of materials was completed in 1986 when the previously selected repositories in each state received the interview transcriptions. These include a subject index, cassette tapes of the interviews, and a bound volume of the paper presented at the 1983 seminar.
Biographical Note Obert Clark Tanner (1904-1993) was born September 20 in Farmington, Utah. His mother, Annie Clark Tanner, was a wife of polygamist Joseph M. Tanner. After serving a Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (LDS) mission in Germany, O.C. Tanner attended the University of Utah and eventually earned B.A., L.L.B. and J.D. degrees from that institution, in addition to an M.A. from Stanford University and many honorary degrees from other Utah schools. He married Grace Adams of Parowan, Utah on 5 August 1931. In 1927, while still an undergraduate at the University of Utah, Tanner founded an business in the basement of his mother's home and began selling commemorative class rings and pins to graduates throughout Northern Utah and eventually manufactured his own products. In the 1940s, Tanner's business expanded to include employee recognition awards for corporations, and, in 1976, O.C. Tanner opened a retail jewelry store in downtown Salt Lake City. Ever successful, the O.C. Tanner Company provided medals for the 2002 Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City, Utah, as well as commemorative rings for athletes in the 2004 Athens and 2006 Torino Games. As a philanthropist, Obert C. Tanner donated his time and money to myriad organizations for the arts and higher education. An instructor of Religious Studies at Stanford University from 1939-1944, Tanner also authored numerous books including The New Testament Speaks, Christ's Ideals for Living and an autobiography, One Man's Journey: In Search of Freedom. O.C. Tanner died 14 October 1993.
Biographical Note Dr. Charles James Nabors, Jr. (1934-1986) was hired as a research assistant in the Department of Anatomy in 1956 and became the University of Utah's first African American faculty member in 1958. Although his scientific career focused on research into cistic fibrosis, Nabors' involvement in the local community extended into the political sphere. A member of the executive board of Salt Lake City's National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) chapter, Nabors was active in state and national government affairs, and he served on the Utah Humanities Council board of directors from 1978-1980. Born in Cleveland, Ohio, Nabors graduated from Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Indiana and earned his doctorate at the University of Utah after his appointment to the faculty. He died in 1986 at the age of 52. George McGovern (b. 1922) served in World War II and was later elected United States congressman from South Dakota from 1957-1961 and senator from 1963-1981. In 1961 he was appointed worldwide director of the Food for Peace program by President John F. Kennedy, and his continuing actions combating world hunger led him to be appointed United Nations Ambassador on World Hunger in 2001 and earned him the World Food Prize in 2008. A decorated veteran, McGovern was known for his opposition to the Vietnam war. He unsuccessfully ran for president against incumbent Richard M. Nixon in 1972.
Biographical Note Louis S. Goodman (1906-2000) was born August 27 in Portland, Oregon. He graduated from Reed College in 1928, earned his medical degree at the University of Oregon in 1932 and interned at Johns Hopkins Hospital before moving to Yale University to study and later teach pharmacology. During World War II, while investigating chemical warfare, Goodman and fellow Yale scientist Dr. Alfred Gilman discovered the effectiveness of nitrogen mustard as an anticancer chemotherapy, a breakthrough which led to chemotherapy's role as a major cancer treatment. In 1943, Goodman left Yale for the University of Vermont, and, in 1944 he moved to Salt Lake City to become the founding chairman of the Department of Pharmacology at the University of Utah's School of Medicine. There, he supervised experiments in anesthesia with the paralyzing muscle relaxant, curare, once used by South American Indians as poison. A particular authority on drugs for treating both cancer and epileptic seizures, Goodman created the journal, Pharmacological Reviews for the American Society of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics in 1949 and co-authored the seminal textbook, Goodman and Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, first published in 1941 and now well in to its tenth edition. He retired from the Department of Pharmacology in 1971 and passed away 19 November 2000 at the age of ninety-four.
Biographical Note Dr. Lennox Tierney is a Japanologist academic in the field of art history, an emeritus professor at the University of Utah, a former Curator of Japanese Art at the Utah Museum of Fine Arts, a former Director of the Pacific Asia Museum, and former Commissioner of Art and Monuments during the Allied occupation of Japan (1945-1952).
Organizational History The American West Center is a research center at the University of Utah which is affiliated with the College of Social and Behavioral Science. The Center is dedicated to providing educational and curricular support to Indian tribes, school districts, other interested organizations, and the general public through consultations, research, and publications.
Biographical Note Herbert Brown Maw (1893-1990) was born in Ogden, Utah. His family later moved to Salt Lake City where he attended LDS High School and the University of Utah Law School. During World War I (1917-1919) he served as a Mormon chaplain in the military. He married Florence Buehler in 1921, and they had four children. He later received a master's degree and a doctor of law degree from Northwestern University. Maw taught at LDS Business College from 1916-1917 and in 1919-1923. He was a Professor of Speech and Political Science at the University of Utah from 1927 until 1940. Maw also acted as Dean of Men at the University of Utah from 1928 until 1936. Maw served 10 years in the Utah State Senate and was its president during 1934-38. As a state senator he advocated direct primary elections, old-age assistance programs, and government control of public utilities. A member of the Democratic party's liberal wing, he failed in three attempts to win his party's gubernatorial nomination against conservatives, including Governor Henry Blood. In 1940, Maw defeated Republican Don B. Colton and began his first term as Governor of Utah. Maw's first act as governor was to reorganize the executive branch. He cut many commissions, boards, and bureaus and replaced them with fewer departments. Under this reorganization the Publicity and Industrial Development Department was created. The department built access roads to scenic attractions for movie makers and built a natural history museum in Vernal, Utah. Response to World War II was a major issue during Maw's terms. He succeeded in bringing military facilities and related industries to Utah. The much needed jobs and activity helped Utah end a decade-long economic slump. Governor Maw's stance on Japanese relocation was more ambiguous. He opposed resettlement of voluntary West Coast evacuees on the Wasatch Front, but vetoed legislation prohibiting some Topaz residents from acquiring land in Utah or leaving the internment camp. However, he did approve a bill prohibiting Japanese aliens from owning or leasing land on a long-term basis. In 1944 Maw was narrowly re-elected over Republican J. Bracken Lee in one of the closest gubernatorial elections in Utah History. During Maw's second term, he sponsored a major highway building program and approved creation of a state water and power board to oversee development of Colorado River water in Utah. Maw directed funding for the Pioneer Centennial celebration in 1947 and completion of the "This Is the Place Monument" at the mouth of Emigration Canyon. The state's handling of welfare, a highly publicized case against two state liquor system employees, and a backfired campaign letter to Mormon leaders seeking support helped lead to Maw's defeat by Republican J. Bracken Lee in 1948. Maw sought a U.S. Senate seat in 1956 but was defeated in the primary. He was a faithful member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and served as a mission president after his terms as Governor. He then retired to private law practice until his nineties. He died in 1990.
Biographical Note s an avid student, L. Jackson Newell has pursued a lifelong committed journey to social ethics and educational philosophies. Beginning with his master’s degree at Duke University, Newell has studied the history and philosophy of colleges and university. He received his M.A. in American and European history followed by his doctorate in the history and philosophy of American and European universities. His education was only the beginning of his involvement in the world of study. Starting in 1974, Newell played a key role at the University of Utah by designing a liberal arts and science program that spanned the campus. His involvement with the Liberal Education Program created a national acclaim because of its interdisciplinary nature and creativity in many aspects of the program. Until 1990, Newell was involved with this program, launching two professorships, the McMurrin Professorship for visiting scholars and the University Professorship for the University of Utah faculty. The McMurrin Professorship, endowed by O.C. Tanner in 1980, was created in the name of Professor McMurrin, a prominent figure at the University of Utah. This professorship brings a scholar of recognized stature to enrich education and discourse. After leaving the University of Utah, Newell, soon after, became a part of Deep Springs, a two year undergraduate college in California. Having completed his undergraduate here, he became involved during a time of struggle at the college to revitalize the once strong school. Deep Springs is noted for its strong community ties that intertwine education and hard work. Founded by L.L. Nunn, a person of interest for Newell, the school was built on the three pillars of academics, labor, and self-governance. As a part of this community, Newell helped reestablish the strong ties to education through financial stability and renovation of college. Beyond his teaching career, L. Jackson Newell has been a part of multiple voluntary organizations. He worked with the Bennion Center for Community Service as well as acted as an advisor for academic leaders at universities worldwide. He has won awards such as the Deep Springs Medal for exemplary service to humanity, the Joseph Katz award for the Advancement of Learning, the Hatch Prize for Teaching and the Distinguished Honors Professor Award at the University of Utah. Among his many awards for teaching and volunteering, Newell has also published a multitude of written works on education including a biographical study of Sterling McMurrin, the above named professor. In Matters of Conscience: Conversations with Sterling McMurrin on Philosophy, Education, and Religion, he explores Sterling McMurrin as United States Commissioner of Education during John F. Kennedy’s presidency. L. Jackson Newell has provided a large amount of work to the world over the years through his volunteering efforts, his teaching valor, and his written word. Currently, Newell is Professor Emeritus at the University of Utah and President Emeritus at Deep Springs College. He also serves on the boards for the Utah Humanities Council, the Tanner Lectures on Human Values, the McMurrin Lectures, and the Virgin River Land Preservation Association. His commitment to his community and education has left a collection of various audio visual artifacts that speak to the magnitude of work he has done during his career in education leadership. More information on L. Jackson Newell can be found on hiswebsite.
Biographical Note Sonia Johnson (born 1936), who was a member of the LDS Church from birth, began speaking out in support of the ERA in 1977. National exposure occurred with her 1978 testimony in front of the U. S. Senate's Constitutional Rights Subcommittee, and she continued speaking and promoting the ERA and denouncing what she perceived to be her church's political activities against the amendment. After a well-publicized church trial in December 1979, Johnson was excommunicated. Afterwards, she continued promoting the ERA as president of the Mormons for ERA group. She spoke at numerous functions throughout the country and appeared on a number of television talk shows. Her book about her embrace of feminism, From Housewife to Heretic, was published in 1981.
Biographical Note Ramiro Cortés was born November 25, 1933, in Dallas, Texas, to Ramiro Cortés Sr. and Elvira Acosta Cortés, parents of Mexican origin. This marriage ended in divorce, when his father left the family in 1936. His brother, Arturo, was one year old. Ramiro began his piano studies at age eight and began composing at age eleven. When he was thirteen years old, his family moved to Denver, Colorado, where he continued his piano studies. He attended South High School where he composed many piano pieces, solo and choral works, and a musical show produced by his junior class. In 1950 he began theoretical studies with Joseph Iadone, a former student of Paul Hindemith. Cortés studied harmony, counterpoint, and twentieth century music with Iadone for two years. In 1951 Cortés enrolled at the University of Denver where he received a full tuition scholarship. This enabled him to continue his studies with Iadone and begin a formal study of composition. Cortés submitted some of his compositions to the National Federation of Music Clubs' competition and was awarded the Charles Ives scholarship to study at the Indian Hill Music School in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, during the summer of 1952. In the fall of 1952 he enrolled at the Yale School of Music and in 1953 was the recipient of the John Day Jackson Prize for his composition Introduction and Fugue for string quartet. Later that year he enrolled at the University of Southern California, where he studied with Halsey Stevens and Ingolf Dahl. In 1954, Cortés received several awards for his works. Perhaps the most significant was the George Gershwin Memorial Award for Sinfonia Sacra which gave Cortés a great deal of national recognition. Cortés was the recipient of the Steinway Centennial Award in 1955 for Piano Sonata and of the Los Angeles Philharmonic Prize for Yerma, A Symphonic Portrait. He received his bachelor of music degree from the University of Southern California that same year, and the following summer served as a fellow on the Huntington Hartford Foundation estate in Pacific Palisades. During his year of graduate studies at the University of Southern California in 1956, Cortés continued his studies with Halsey Stevens and Ingolf Dahl. He received a Fulbright Scholarship to study composition with Goffredo Petrass in Rome. Later that year, he received first prize in the National Federation of Music Clubs Young Composers competition. Cortés received a renewal of the Fulbright scholarship and spent a second year in Rome. The summer of 1958 was spent at the Huntington Hartford Foundation, where he worked on three sacred compositions which had been commissioned by the Concorda Society of Princeton. He was awarded first prize in the Broadcast Music Inc. Student Composers competition. The money from this award was used to finance Cortés' studies in composition at Princeton with Roger Sessions during the fall semester. While at Princeton, he composed a score commissioned by the Pittsburgh Bicentennial Association for a film on the history of Pittsburgh. While at Princeton, he also wrote a song cycle on poems by Herman Melville which earned him the George Bolek Memorial Award of the National Federation of Music Clubs. Cortés again returned to the Huntington Hartford Foundation for the summer of 1959. In New York during February of 1960, Cortés married Nancee Heimbecher Charles--Charles was her professional name--whom he had met in junior high school. During that year he received the John Hay Whitney Foundation Fellowship. The most important score he produced was Symphony in Three Movements for small orchestra. He submitted this composition to the Queen Elizabeth of Belgium International Competition, and was awarded the silver medal. Cortés enrolled at the Juilliard School of Music in 1961 and held the Rodgers and Hammerstein Scholarship. He received two additional awards while attending Juilliard: the Alexandre Gretchaninoff Memorial Prize and the Benjamin Prize. He finished course requirements for his master's degree in 1962. That same year he received an award from the National Institute of Arts and Letters. Cortés worked as a computer programmer for Systems Development Corporation from 1963 to 1966 when he was invited to be a visiting lecturer at the University of California at Los Angeles. The following year he was offered a faculty position at the University of Southern California, and in 1970 he was promoted to associate professor with tenure. In 1971 he and Nancee separated and were divorced a year later. In 1972-1973 he served as composer in residence at the University of Utah and the following year he joined the faculty as chair of theory and composition. He continued to teach at the University of Utah until his death in 1984. Cortés spent 1978-1979 in Los Angeles on sabbatical from the University of Utah. In the latter year, he and Nancee were remarried. He studied the works of Igor Stravinsky extensively, and presented fifty-five lectures on the music of Stravinsky for the Utah radio station KUER in 1982. Ramiro Cortés died of heart failure July 2, 1984, in Salt Lake City, Utah, at age fifty-one.
Biographical Note Brigham Dwaine Madsen (b.1914), was raised in Pocatello, Idaho. In 1935 he served a Mormon mission to the Cumberland Mountains. He attended the University of California, Berkeley, where he received a Ph.D. in history. Travels abroad to Germany during World War II saw him act as chief historian for Patton's Third Army, where he observed the War Crimes Trials in Nuremberg, among other significant experiences. After the war, he accepted a faculty position at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. His curiosity about Mormon history soon brought him head to head with the limits of academic freedom there at that time, ultimately resulting in his resignation and forcing him to work in construction for seven years until a Utah State University position opened. Madsen turned his attention to Native American history. In pursuing the truth about an 1862 military campaign against the Northwestern Shoshoni, he discovered that the engagement was not a battle but a brutal slaughter. His dogged persistence in this area resulted in the establishment of the Bear River Massacre National Historic Landmark. There was similar controversy in his writings on other Western topics, including Mormon history. Dr. Madsen also served as chair of the University of Utah History Department, director of libraries, deputy academic vice president, and administrative vice president. He was honored for his efforts with a Distinguished Service Award from the Utah Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters and two awards from the University of Utah: Honorary Doctor of Humanities and Distinguished Teacher of the Year. He is the author of eight books: Against the Grain: Memoirs of a Western Historian, The Bannock of Idaho, Corinne: The Gentile Capital of Utah, Exploring the Great Salt Lake: The Stansbury Expedition of 1848-50, Glory Hunter: A Biography of Patrick Edward Connor, The Lemhi: Sacajawea's People, The Northern Shoshoni, and The Shoshoni Frontier and the Bear River Massacre. He is the co-author of: North to Montana! Jehus, Bullwhackers, and Mule Skinners on the Montana Trail. He is the editor of three works:A Forty-Niner in Utah with the Stansbury Exploration of Great Salt Lake: Letters and Journal of John Hudson, 1848-1850, The Now Generation: Student Essays on Social Change in the Sixties, and Studies of the Book of Mormon. He has also authored several monograph-length studies and contributed to such books as The Feminine Frontier: Wyoming Women, 1850-1900.
Historical Note In 1964, History professors A. R. Mortensen and Gregory Crampton conceived the University of Utah's American West Center (originally called the Western History Center) as an institution devoted exclusively to research on the American West. As a part of its mission to create and disseminate knowledge about the American West, the center established the ongoing Ethnic Oral Histories Project to explore the experiences of Utah members of Native American and ethnic immigrant communities, including Italian Americans. Many Italians immigrated to Utah during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Although some came because they were Mormon converts, more were attracted to Utah as laborers for the state's railroad and mining industries in Salt Lake, Weber and Carbon Counties. Although varying degrees of strife existed between the Italian immigrants, other residents of Utah, the Ku Klux Klan, and even between immigrants from Northern and Southern Italy, Italian Americans developed active communities like the "Little Italy" near Salt Lake City's Rio Grande Station and established lodges and societies in mining towns like Bingham and Castle Gate. Miners joined labor unions and were active in several strikes in the early twentieth century. The interviews in this collection focus on these early days, but they also more loosely encompass the Italian American experience in Utah from the end of the nineteenth century to the mid-late twentieth century when these oral histories were compiled.
Biographical Note Edna Clark Ericksen was born in Auburn, Wyoming, on 19 November 1889 to Hyrum Don Carlos Clark and Ann Eliza Porter Clark. In 1905, at the age of sixteen, Edna left Star Valley and went to Paris, Idaho, in order to attend Fielding Academy, a LDS Church-sponsored combination elementary and high school. Although she did not complete her studies there, she enrolled at Brigham Young College in 1907. There she met her future husband, Ephraim E. Ericksen, who became the University of Utah's first Professor of Philosophy. They married on 8 June 1910. In 1920, Edna was called to the General Board of the LDS Primary organization, and was assigned the task of developing a program for boys between the ages of nine and eleven. Characteristically, Edna began by listening to the boys themselves, and then went on to develop what has been called the most successful program in the history of the Primary. It was at this time that Edna turned her imagination and flair for craftwork into a home industry that would contribute to the Ericksen family coffers for the next thirty years. She designed, made, and sold uniforms, badges, and insignias for the Primary and other local organizations. In 1932, Edna was elected to the Utah House of Representatives, where she served until 1935. Six years later, she was appointed to fill the State Senate seat vacated by Gordon Weggeland. She was elected in her own right the following year. After the death of E. E. Ericksen in 1967, Edna traveled to Europe, Mexico, and the Far East. In 1974, she was honored by the Utah Women's Political Caucus and the National Organization for Women for her contribution to women's causes. Edna Clark Ericksen's family is committed to the preservation of her personal history. After a message was sent to the Clark Family Association by Clark S. Knowlton reminding the family that LDS Church authorities have instructed members to keep a record of their lives and the lives of their ancestors various family members taped interviews with Edna Clark Ericksen between 1972 and 1982. Edna Clark Ericksen died in Salt Lake City on 15 August 1983.
Biographical Note Stephen Williams stuided film at the University of Southern California (USC) and earned his Master of Fine Arts degree (MFA) at the University of Utah. He has taught at Salt Lake Community College since 2002. Willimas has directed corporate, short and feature films, including some works exploring issues facing homosexual members fo the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Biographical Note Darin Tinney is a graduate of the film department at the University of Utah. In addition to being a freelance video producer, Tinney has also worked for Salt Lake City television stations KSL-TV and KJZZ-TV. He has produced training and promotional videos for private businesses and public agencies. Tinney has also worked as an assistant producer on a public television historical documentary as well as having written, directed and produced a number of films of his own. Darrin Tinney is a teacher for YouthCity Always, a Salt Lake City arts education program.
Biographical Note At the age of 42, Dr. Jenny Mackenzie left her career as a social worker to become a documentary filmmaker. Mackenzie was inspired to make a film about her daughter's soccer team after the team's consistent success compelled the coach (also Mackenzie) to move the team into a boys' league. The resulting film was selected for film festivals across the country and won awards at the Danville International Children's Film Festival (best short film), the Newport International Film Festival (best children's short) and the Utah Arts Festival (best short film). It has been nominated for a "Billie" award (named after Billie Jean King) for the positive portrayal of women and girls in the media.
Biographical Note Tina Gonzales Garcia (1934-1992) was born in Ojo Caliente, New Mexico. She worked as a federal investigator and received several recognition awards for her involvement in issues related to the Hispanic Community including "Hispanic Woman of the Year" in 1989.
Organizational History In 1966 Doris Duke funded a program to interview Native Americans on their views of history and their place in society. The program was directed by C. Gregory Crampton of the American West Center at the University of Utah. The interviews, now housed in the J. Willard Marriot Library, represent various Native American tribes from the intermountain region and non-indians who were closely associated with these tribes.
Biographical Note Steven Pecchia-Bekkum has worked in film and video education since 1991 when he received Associate of Science degrees in filmmaking and video production from Minneapolis Community and Technical College. He graduated from Metropolitan State University in St. Paul, Minnesota in 1997 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in liberal arts with an emphasis in translating literary works into film. In 2002 he earned his Master of Fine Arts degree in film from the University of Utah. In addition to his years teaching production, animation and screenwriting classes at the University of Utah, Pecchia-Bekkum has taught film studies at Weber State University and mentored young filmmakers at Salt Lake City's Spy Hop productions. In 2011 he began designing the Film Department's new "Sound for Film and Video" course based on years of experience in production and post-production sound. Steven Pecchia-Bekkum has written and directed several films, most notably Walking in the Valley of the Gods (2003), which was an official selection of the Anchorage International Film Festival, the Hollywood DV Film Festival, the Edgeworks Film Festival and the Utah Short Film & Video Festival.
Historical Note The Walter and Hays Band was formed in 1985 in Salt Lake City, Utah and performed until 1993. Band members Walter Gregory, Tony Summerhays, Cory Brown, and Dan Stephensen were best known for their 1988 novelty song, "Mormon Rap."
Biographical Note G. Donald Gale wrote, produced and broadcast daily editorial segments for KSL News in Salt Lake City, Utah from 1977 until his retirement in 1998. Former Vice President for News and Public Affairs at Bonneville International Corporation, Gale earned Bachelor of Arts (B.A.), Master of Arts (M.A.) and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degrees from the University of Utah and served on the faculty there and at Weber State University. He is the author of the book Bags to Riches about Utah businessman and philanthropist "Izzi" Wagner. Don Gale continues to write a monthly column for the Deseret Morning News and the Ogden Standard-Examiner. He is President of Words, Words, Words, Inc., a communication consulting company.
Biographical Note Edward Randle "Ed" LaChapelle (1926-2007) was born in May 31 Tacoma, Washington. After studying physics and math at the University of Puget Sound and spending time at the Swiss Federal Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research he joined the United States Forest Service as a snow ranger in Alta, Utah in 1952. In addition to his two decades of work at Alta's avalanche center, LaChapelle was professor of atmospheric sciences and geophysics at the University of Washington from 1967 to 1982 and professor emeritus until his death. He also researched the subject at the Institute for Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) of the University of Colorado at Boulder from 1973-1977 and was involved in the 1968 development of the avalanche transceiver beacon. Edward LaChapelle died of a heart attack at Colorado's Monarch Ski Area on February 1, 2007.
Biographical Note E. Richard Hart is an historian of the American West. He was associated with the American West Center at the University of Utah from 1969 to 1975. From 1979 to 1984, he was director of the Institute of the American West at Sun Valley, Idaho. He was editor for several publications resulting from conferences held by the Institute. In 1984, Hart helped to establish the Institute of the North American West in Seattle, Washington. He has also served as an expect witness in several federal court cases involving land claims by the Zuni Indians.
Historical Note For four years between 1979 and 1983 Aloysius "Al" Church was employed as a freelance on-air talent and field producer for KUTV's semi-news program, PM Magazine, a syndicated production from Westinghouse Broadcasting that was aired on KUTV as a soft news feature with both national and local segments. He appeared twice a month as the local restaurant reviewer during that time period, focusing on Utah restaurants. He had total editorial freedom and worked with a photographer and sound person who assisted in both the filming and editing of the segments. PM Magazine aired from 6:30-7:00 p.m. During that time, He also worked with PM staffers as a field producer, generating, filming, writing and editing other non-restaurant features (these ran for 5-7 minutes; the restaurant pieces were 90 seconds to 2 minutes). Some of these are included in the archival footage (though several were erased as PM was being phased out of KUTV's program line up.) Several won national and regional awards for writing, story content, and editing, including a regional Emmy nomination for a story (erased) on the Utah Artificial Heart (in which Drs. Rob Jarvick and Willem Kolf appeared). The train story won a national editing award for photographer John Krantzer. Some of the longer stories (articificial heart, rodeo cowboy) appeared on the national syndication reels in the 100 plus TV markets that aired PM.)
Biographical Note Dr. Sterling M. McMurrin (1914-1996), was a nationally recognized educator, administrator, and philosopher. He was a Professor of Philosophy and History at the University of Utah in 1948; Academic Vice President, 1960-1961; Provost, 1965-1966; and Dean of Graduate School, University of Utah, 1966-1979. Dr. McMurrin also held many National positions as well, including United States Commissioner of Education, 1961-1962; and Chairman of the Commission on Instructional Technology, 1968-1970.
Biographical Note Leo Loving is a Utah filmmaker and the founder of Loving Images - The Good Movie Company. According to the company website, www.lovingimages.net, Loving Images is "dedicated to the proposition that respect for traditional American values is the best way to further American ideals and to secure peace and freedom for ourselves and future generations . . . Loving Images recognizes that these same values are accepted by men and women of good will the world over and is therefore, committed to presenting, upholding and promoting these values through the medium of film." Loving and his organization believe in the heroism and martyrdom of John Birch. John Birch was originally sent to China as a missionary for the Fundamentalist Baptist Church. He quickly learned the language and taught the natives his beliefs. As the threat of Japanese invasion increased during World War II, Birch assisted the local Chinese governments as well as the United States military by aiding the Doolittle Raiders and later assisting to create an intelligence operation in China to help Chinese and US forces monitor the movements of the Japanese. Birch later joined earned the rank of Captain in the United States Air Force and continued work in intelligence. Before the Japanese surrender, Birch was sent on a mission by his commanding officer, but he and his party were taken captive by Chinese Communist forces that later killed and mutilated him and one of his Chinese officers. Some belive his murder by Communist Chinese officers catalyzed the conflict between the US and Communist China.
Biographical Note Rick Page is a local Salt Lake City filmmaker. In addition to writing and directing his own short films, Page has worked as a cameraman on numerous television shows and movies filmed in the Salt Lake City area, including Touched by an Angel, Legally Blonde 2 (Charles Herman-Wurmfeld 2003), High School Musical 3 (Kenny Ortega 2008) and over 50 others.
Historical Note The official description of the William R. and Erlyn Gould Distinguished Lecture on Technology and the Quality of Life Series states: "The William R. and Erlyn J. Gould Distinguished Lecture on Technology and the Quality of Life was inaugurated October 7, 1992, at the University of Utah Marriott Library. In establishing the lecture series, Bill and Erlyn Gould both recognized the critical need for continuing public education about issues regarding modern technology and its impact on our daily lives. Inherent to the advantage of technology is the importance of understanding the ramifications and responsibilities that accompany modern scientific discovery. Only through continuing public education can scientific fact and social philosophy be successfully merged. The lecture series is intended to provide a forum for the discussion of problems, issues, experiences, and successful case histories of the regeneration and preservation of our communities through the application of modern technology. It is hoped that an increased awareness of obligation in the public trust will emerge among practitioners of technology as they address the very important environmental and life-deteriorating problems facing society today. Through interaction between technologists and opinion leaders in communities that are the benefactors of their efforts, a synergism can develop through which society may see great benefit in the long-term future. With the lecture series, it is intended that a dialogue be opened between the technologist, the philosopher, the humanist, the private citizen, and all who may wish to assert an active voice in our collective future. In such an atmosphere of mutual interest and understanding, no one group will be singled out for exclusion or blame for society's ills; rather, through understanding, discourse, and public education the positive direction of our future may be shaped. The Marriott Library's mission is to provide information in all formats sufficient to support the scholarship, teaching, and research programs of the University of Utah to its students and faculty, and to the citizens of the state. In this light, the annual lecture will strive toward providing a greater public understanding of technology and the social potential that can be cultivated. In conjunction with the Utah Science, Engineering, and Medical Archives program of the Marriott Library, the lecture series will provide the means of bridging the many disciplines of technology while meeting the needs of the public in understanding its rich and diverse technological heritage.
Biographical Note A native of Japan, Masashi Kamimura taught classes while earning his Master of Fine Arts degree in film at the University of Utah. He was chosen to direct the independent film The Speed of Life (2010) after the producers saw his student film, "Brother Japan Sister US."
Historical Note The University of Utah Utes basketball team was founded in 1908. The team has finished its season among the National Collegiate Athelitcs Association's (NCAA) top-25 teams 19 times 1949-2009 and has played in the following conferences: –1937: Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference 1938–1961: Skyline Conference 1962–1998: Western Athletic Conference (WAC) 1999–2010: Mountain West Conference 2011– : Pacific-12 Conference (Pac-12)
Biographical Note Cordell Wolking was a psychology student at the University of Utah in the late 1990s when he produced "The Animal's Court."
Historical Note After the decline of silver mining in Little Cottonwood Canyon the area was repurposed for winter recreation. After acquiring the Blackjack and Snowbird mining claims just west of Alta, Alta Lodge employee Ted Johnson partnered with Texas oilman and rancher Richard D. Bass to develop Snowbird as a year round resort. Snowbird begain operation in December 1971.
Alan Engen (b.1940), the son of Alf Engen, began skiing at the age of two. He attended the University of Utah, where he was a member of the ski team from 1958 to 1962. He graduated with B.A. and B.F.A. degrees in Art History in 1963. In a lifetime of competitive skiing, he has won countless championships. Engen is currently the director of skiing at Alta and chairman/president of the Alf Engen Ski Museum. Alf Engen (1909-1997) was a Norwegian-American skier, ski instructor and owner. His two younger brothers, Sverre (1911-2001) and Corey (1916-2006), were also both accomplished skiers, and their combined contributions to the development and popularity of skiing in the Western United States were significant. Engen was born in Mjondallen, Norway, the oldest of three boys. As a son of the famous skier Trond Engen he was reared in skiing from a young age. In 1929,at age twenty, Engen immigrated to the United States with his younger brother, Sverre. They settled in Chicago, where the two brothers joined the American-Norwegian Athletic Club to meet fellow Norwegians. In 1931, he settled permanently in Salt Lake City. His youngest brother, Kaare, and their mother, Martha, immigrated to the United States in 1933 and the three Engen brothers traveled the United States as professional jumpers, breaking Nordic records and gaining recognition wherever they went. Engen's success as a skier is beyond compare. He began his impressive professional career by capturing the National Jumping Champion title eight times between the years of 1931 and 1946. Furthermore, at the age of 37 and on borrowed skis, he won the 1946 National Jumping title by leaping 259 feet. He was also the National Classic Champion (cross country and jumping combined) twice during these years in 1939 and 1941. After learning how to downhill ski at the age of 30, Engen became national downhill and slalom champion in 1947. Engen was also the recipient of numerous awards including the All-American Ski Trophy, 1937, Americanism Award in 1940, Helm's Hall of Fame Award in 1954; and Skier's Hall of Fame Award in 1956. He is credited for developing the technique of powder skiing, honed at the Alta Ski Area. He established the Alf Engen Ski School at Alta, Utah, and became director of the Deseret News and Telegram Free Ski School. In 1948, Engen and Walter Prager were co-coaches for the United States Olympic ski team. He assisted in the creation of over 30 various ski resorts in the Western United States, in a lifetime dedicated to the development of the industry. Alf Engen died in 1997, at the age of 88. His two younger brothers both lived to the age of 90.
Biographical Note Mignon H. Olive attended the University of Utah between 1977 and 1984 and recorded her lectures due to hearing problems. She earned a Bachelor of Science, a Bachelor of Fine Arts, and a Master of Education. She worked for fifteen years as an educational psychologist for Management Training Corps, working with youth ages 17 to 25 who needed special training to qualify for jobs in the work force. Olive retired at the age of 67 and donated her class recordings and notes for research use.
Historical Note The study of anthropology at the University of Utah dates back to 1914, when a Department of Archeology was established under the leadership of Dean Byron Cummings. The disciplines of anthropology and sociology were combined in a single department under Dr. Levi Edgar Young in 1917. An independent Department of Anthropology was established under Professor Andrew Kerr in 1926. Anthropology and sociology were combined again in 1935. In 1948 anthropology was reconstituted as an independent department with E.A. Hoebel as chair and has remained so ever since. During the period covered by these records, Jesse Jennings (1953-1961, 1966-1967), Charles Dibble (1961-1964), Robert Euler (1964-1966), Wick Miller (1967-1969), Seymore Parker (1969-1978), John McCullough (1979-1985), Larry Loeb (1985-1990), Dennis O'Rourke (1990-1996), and Kristen Hawkes (1996-1997) served as chair.
Historical Note The Univertsity of Utah was designated the official labor archives of the State of Utah in 1971. The paper records and audio-visual items created or kept by various Utah labor unions have been deposited here.
Biographical Note Filmmaker Jan Andrews earned a Master of Fine Arts degree from the University of Utah in 1998. A member of the Independent Film and Video Association and the European Documentary Network, Andrews is a visual arts panelist for the National Foundation for the Advancement in the Arts.
Biographical Note Tyrone Davies (b. 1977) earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in theatre studies from the University of Utah in 2002. An experimental filmmaker, Davies has displayed his work at video installations at galleries in Salt Lake City and San Francisco and at film festivals all over the world. He is currently working on a Master of Fine Arts degree at the San Francisco Art Institute.
Biographical Note Trent Harris is an independent filmmaker based in Salt Lake City, Utah. He earned Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) and Master of Fine Arts (M.F.A.) degrees from the University of Utah in the early days of its film program. After producing features for the local television newsmagazine progam EXTRA at KUTV from 1978-1981, Harris left Utah to study directing at the American Film Institue, where he produced "The Orkly Kid" (1985), based on footage he had shot for an unaired episode of EXTRA. These two films became the basis of one of Harris' best know works, The Beaver Trilogy (2000). In addition to high profile feature films such as Rubin and Ed (1992) and Plan 10 from Outer Space, Harris had written, directed and produced numerous documentary and narrative films which have screened and won awards at film festivals around the world.
Biographical Note Frank O'Rourke (1916-1989) was born in Denver, Colorado. In a career spanning four decades, he published more than sixty works of fiction. The versatility which became a hallmark of O'Rourke's writing was demonstrated in the more than one hundred short stories which appeared during the 1940s and 1950s in such magazines as The Saturday Evening Post, Ladies' Home Journal, and Esquire. His first book, E Company, introduced in 1945 by Simon and Schuster, was hailed as the work of a "fresh and outstanding talent." From 1948 to 1956, O'Rourke published seven sports novels, two mysteries (one under the pseudonym Frank O'Malley), an industrial novel, and twenty westerns. The early westerns were published in hardcover by Random House, and since they were continually reprinted, they came to be his most visible work and he was generally categorized over the years as a writer of westerns, the range of his work being overlooked. While O'Rourke continued to write adventure westerns for several mass market publishers through the 1950s, he began a relationship with William Morrow and Company for publication of his more substantial work. The Diamond Hitch (1958) dealt with the realities of western range life and was the first to rank with authentic Americana, followed by The Last Ride (1958), a story of an old, freedom loving cowboy, chasing a proud old stallion who loves his freedom just as much. The Man Who Found Mountains (1957) was one of the few works of fiction to make effective literary use of Hispanic witchcraft in New Mexico. In 1959, O'Rourke's historical novel of New Mexico, The Far Mountains, won the Southern Library Association biennial award for a work which "best reflected the culture and heritage of the southwest and for literary excellence." William Morrow and Company supported O'Rourke's creative endeavors, and in the years during their association, published novels set in midwest America, which drew on his Nebraska background. Contemporary satires on modern society's worship of money, Instant Gold (1964), and the automobile, The Duchess Says No (1965), were the last to be published by Morrow; Kevin Connor and Patrick O'Malley were two pseudonyms used during this period. O'Rourke moved to J. B. Lippincott for the publication of The Swift Runner (1969) and The Abduction of Virginia Lee (1970). Three novels were produced as motion pictures, including the classic adventure film The Professionals in 1966 from his novel A Mule for the Marquesa (1964). In his final years, Frank O'Rourke devoted himself to the creation of stories for children. The first, Burton and Stanley, was published posthumously by David R. Godine in 1993 to numerous accolades in the children's book trade and was also given a Parents Choice Award. In addition to this, Ellen and the Barber, a book of three short stories, set in the 1930s, was published, also posthumously, by St. Martins Press in 1997. In 2002, a collection of early baseball stories, The Heavenly Work Series, was published by Carroll and Graf, with an introduction by Darryl Brock. Frank O'Rourke continued writing until the end of his life. Finally, beset by constant pain from a twenty-year struggle with bronchial asthma and fighting the effects of prednisone (a dangerous steroid), Frank O'Rourke took back his destiny and ended his life on 27 April 1989 in Tucson, Arizona.
Historical Note The University of Utah’s dance program has two departments within the College of Fine Arts: the Department of Modern Dance and the Department of Ballet. The heritage of dance at the University of Utah began in 1892 with a program developed by Maud May Babcock, the first female member of the University’s faculty. Babcock founded the University of Utah Departments of Speech and of Physical Education, the original departments to have housed dance majors before they were formally combined into a single department under the College of Fine Arts in 1966. Prior to the integration, the Department of Modern Dance was part of the Department of Physical Education and Ballet was part of the Department of Theatre. The earliest record of dance courses at the University of Utah occurred in 1906 when dance was offered as a general physical education course. Dance wasn’t established as a major until 1953, when Elizabeth R. Hayes, appointed Director of Modern Dance in 1940, instituted it as a part of the Physical Education Department. A ballet emphasis was not created until 1951 when William F. Christensen was offered the position of professor of ballet. His career at the University of Utah began in 1949 when President A. Ray Olpin invited him to choreograph the University of Utah’s Summer Festival Productions, a series of musicals and operas performed outside in the University’s stadium. After two years choreographing this program, he was offered the position which created one of the first ballet programs at an American university. Under his leadership, ballet became a “Field of Emphasis” with a departmental major in Speech in 1953 (Habel, 2010, p. 26). In 1962, a BFA degree with a major in Ballet was offered through the College of Fine Arts. In 1966, the new Ballet and Modern Dance Department was formed with D. Gordan Paxman as Departmental Chairman, Willam F. Christensen as Director of Ballet, and Elizabeth R. Hayes as Director of Modern Dance. The combined department eventually separated in 1977 due to an inability, according to Hayes, to find anyone to chair the combined departments who could satisfy both the ballet and modern dance faculties. The two departments, although separate, are still housed in the College of Fine Arts. In 1988, Hayes officially retired from the department in June after 48 years, having taught longer than any other woman faculty member at the University of Utah. HISTORY OF THE NEW AND OLD DANCE BUILDINGS The Departments of Modern Dance and Ballet are currently housed in the Alice Sheets Marriott Center for Dance, named after the wife of J. Willard Marriott, businessman and entrepreneur for whom the university’s library had been named. Funding for the much-needed new building was an arduous task, taking over two decades to finally fund. Formally, dance was housed in the old Physical Education complex directly west of the Park Building. The building, constructed around 1905, eventually came to be known as the “Dance Building.” Originally built for physical education, it had been used for varying purposes through the years, including as a student health facility, a university cafeteria, biology and pharmacy laboratories, and as computer science classrooms and offices. By the mid-eighties, the building was neither safe nor functional. It did not meet building and safety codes, nor did it meet the needs of the growing Departments of Ballet and Modern Dance. Several proposals for a new dance building were submitted to the State Legislature, but they remained a low priority on the building list for twenty-five years until the State Fire Marshall condemned the structure in 1984. At this point, the Utah State Legislature appropriated $3.04 million for a new dance building, and in 1986, the J. Willard Marriott family contributed the remaining $2 million needed to fund the new dance building. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION M. Ray Kingston and Kip Harris, partners in FFKR Architects/Planners and Interior Design, collaborated on the design for the new facility. Having already designed the Salt Lake City Symphony Hall and the Randall L. Jones Theater for the Shakespearean festival in Cedar City, the firm offered the experience in designing spaces for the Arts. Kingston, lead architect on the project, had studied modern dance at the university in the 1950s while working towards his architectural degree. He was adamant that the building’s design meet the classroom and performance needs of the dance departments and their students. The building was specifically designed with the “comfort, convenience and aesthetic needs of the dancers in mind” (Habel, 2010, p. 400). The building was constructed of red brick and Utah sandstone, and although architecturally contemporary, it blended with historic campus structures. At the heart of the three-story building are six large dance studios, a 333-seat professional theatre, classrooms on each floor, a faculty preparation studio on the third floor, locker rooms with stage access, a box office, administrative and faculty offices on the second floor, and an outdoor sky deck on the third level. The formal performance space in the Marriott Center for Dance was named in honor of Elizabeth R. Hayes and Willam F. Christensen, in recognition of their outstanding contributions to dance and the University of Utah. The 1988–1989 academic year was the last year that classes and performances were held in the old Dance Building. On September 25, 1989, the new 64,400 square-foot Alice Sheets Marriott Center for Dance building opened its doors to students, and ushered in a new era in the department’s history. NOTABLE ALUMNI Faculty and graduates of the University of Utah’s Ballet Department were fundamental in the formation and growth of Ballet West, Utah’s major professional ballet company. In 1955, Christensen and the University Theatre Ballet presented the first production of the Nutcracker in the University of Utah's Kingsbury Hall, a production that has become an annual Christmas treat for Salt Lake City audiences. In the 1960s, two different professional modern dance companies were established by alumni. The Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company was formed in 1964 by Shirley Ririe and Joan Woodbury, professors of modern dance at the University. In 1966, the Repertory Dance Theatre was opened which has such dancers as Merce Cunnigham and Doris Humphrey among their professionals. In 1966, a $370,000 grant was made to the University of Utah by the Rockefeller Foundation to establish the Utah Repertory Dance Theatre (RDT), the first full time modern dance company outside of New York City. The grant was the first of its kind awarded to a university by the foundation. The project director was Virginia Tanner, a Salt Lake native, nationally recognized children’s dance educator, and founder of the Utah Children’s Dance Theatre (1949). Both RDT and Ririe-Woodbury received local and national recognition for their work, participating in educational and community outreach programs throughout the country. Both companies had a symbiotic relationship with the modern dance program at the University of Utah. While the companies offered professional performing opportunities for skilled dance students, the department provided a pool of students from which the companies drew members. Through the years many modern dance students performed professionally with RDT and Ririe-Woodbury. Several alumni of the Departments of Ballet and Modern Dance became notable dancers and faculty members of the University of Utah’s dance departments. Bené Arnold Arnold received both her B.F.A. and M.F.A. from the University of Utah’s Department of Ballet. From 1963 to 1975, she served as the ballet mistress for the future company, Ballet West. In 1975, she joined the University of Utah Department of Ballet faculty. In 1998, Arnold became the first woman and only faculty member from Fine Arts and Humanities to be named Distinguished Professor. When Arnold retired from the University of Utah, she was named Distinguished Professor Emerita. Since 2008, Arnold has served as the Interim Chair of the Department of Ballet. Phyllis Haskell In August of 1987, Phyllis Haskell joined the department as the Chair of the Department of Modern Dance. Haskell was a 1971 MFA graduate of the University of Utah. She was also a member of the Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company from 1971 to 1979, and acted as the company’s Assistant Artistic Director from 1977 to 1979. Tomm Ruud After 10 years with William Christensen's Ballet West in Salt Lake City, Tomm Ruud joined the San Francisco Ballet in 1975. Ruud was best known for his role as Drosselmeyer in the Nutcracker. Donna White In 1979, Donna White joined the faculty as an Associate Instructor having finished her MFA the previous year. White came to the faculty with a strong performance and choreography background. She danced with Ririe-Woodbury (1971-76); performed and taught with Tandy Beal and Company (1977-87); and founded Donna White and DANCEWORKS in 1979, a company for which she directed, choreographed, and performed with until 1984. Donna is currently Professor in the Department of Modern Dance at the University of Utah and was the former Chair of the Department from 2002-2010. Donna has been on the Modern Dance faculty since 1996. She also holds the position of Associate Dean of the Graduate School at the University. Reference List Habel, S. (2010). History of the Modern Dance Program at the University of Utah. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Historical Note East Carbon High School was initially part of Dragerton before the incorporation of Dragerton and Columbia in 1973 that created East Carbon City. The high school, however, held the name from 1958 when the name and Viking mascot were appointed to the school. It remained one of the major high schools of Carbon County until 2005 when it was torn down and replaced by Bruin Point Elementary.
Biographical Note William "Bill" Tanner and Hertha Tanner grew up in Salt Lake City and Sandy, Utah. William became an oral surgeon and Hertha a homemaker. During the time these films were taken, the family was living in Hayward, California with their children Judy, Justin, Valen, Clelen, and Kylan.
Biographical Note David Cannon Evans was born February 24, 1924, in Salt Lake City, Utah. He is the son of David W. and Beatrice C. Evans. His father was the founder and president of David W. Evans, Inc., an advertising firm. He married Joy Frewin in 1947, and is the father of seven children. Evans attended the University of Utah, receiving his Bachelor of Science in Physics in 1949 and his Doctorate in Physics in 1953. After completing his education, he was employed by the Bendix Corp. as Senior Physicist in the Computer Division. In 1955, he was promoted to Director of Engineering of the Computer Division. This position gave him responsibility for research, development, and product design of commercial computing systems and special purpose information processing systems for military and industrial applications. Two of the most noteworthy projects he directed while at Bendix were the innovative G-20 computing system and the G-15 computer, the first inexpensive general purpose computer to be mass produced. In 1962, Evans joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Utah. He later was named the University's first Director of Computer Science in 1965, becoming the main force in the founding of the Computer Science Department. During his years at the University of Utah, Evans pioneered time-shared computing systems, as well as real-time continuous-tone computer graphics. Other research activities included the hidden-line problem, syntax-directed computers, constraint processor declarative languages, and memory systems. Evans left his full-time position at the University in 1966, but continued his involvement with the institution as an Adjunct Professor. In 1967, he served on the University of Utah Academic Policy Committee. During the same years he was employed by the University of Utah, Evans was also a Professor of Electrical Engineering and the Associate Director of the Computer Center at the University of California at Berkeley. During this time, he was the principal investigator of a project sponsored by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (United States Department of Defense) aimed at improving computer-aided problem solving capabilities. Along with Ivan Sutherland, Evans founded Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation in 1968, serving as President and/or Chief Executive Officer until his retirement. Throughout his life, Evans was involved in numerous professional organizations. These included the American Federation of Information Processing Societies, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, the National Academy of Engineering, the National Academy of Science, the American Electronics Association, the Utah Engineers Council, the Association for Computing Machinery, the National Research Council's Committee on Computer-Aided Manufacturing, the Committee for Computer Science in Electrical Engineering, and various university advisory committees, among others. In addition, he was also involved in community service, participating in directorial capacities for Westminster College and Holy Cross Hospital. He was also Vice Chair of the State of Utah Steering Committee for Systems Planning and Computing, and was involved with the Boy Scouts of America throughout his life. Evans & Sutherland Computer Corporation was founded by David Evans and Ivan Sutherland in 1968. The first offices for the company were in a building on the University of Utah campus. Eventually, the company found a permanent home in the University of Utah Research Park, where it grew to a company occupying four buildings and employing 830 people, with sales of 60 million, by 1982. Before going public, the company was a privately held company backed by a group of eastern investment groups. These included Venrock, the Venture Capital Investment Co. of the Rockefeller family, the Endowment Management and Research Corp., GCA Corp., and Hambrecht & Quist investment bankers. The company was one of the first developers of interactive graphics. The first product produced by the company was the Line Drawing System, a high-speed interactive graphics display system patterned after a prototype based on research done by Dr. Sutherland at Harvard University. The application of the Line Drawing System to flight simulation followed its introduction. Along with advanced versions of the Line Drawing System, other computer graphics systems have been developed by the company. Novoview was a family of computer image generators which produce visual scenes for use in pilot training simulation. This product was the outcome of Evans & Sutherland's collaboration with Redifon/Rediffusion, a European company specializing in computer simulation. The Picture System product line was a three-dimensional graphics system which yielded smooth motion computations for rotation, translation, clipping, scaling and zoom display requirements. Other products, including Digistar, a system which adapted computer graphics for projection displays in planetariums, have also been developed by the company. In addition to its collaboration with Redifon/Rediffusion, Evans & Sutherland purchased or invested in other companies to enhance their product line. These include Shape Data, VLSI Technologies, Inc., Mosaic Systems, and Unicad. Major customers included many commercial airlines, Volkswagen, General Motors, McDonnell Douglas, the United States Department of Defense, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Boeing, General Dynamics, General Electric, International Business Machines, and Northrup.
Historical Note Mexican Hat Expeditions was a commercial river running company based in Mexican Hat, Utah. After the death of Grand Canyon commercial river running pioneer Norman Nevills in 1949, his company, "Nevills Expeditions," was acquired by Nevills' boatmen Jim and Bob Rigg and Frank Wright, who renamed the company "Mexican Hat Expeditions" in 1950. In 1957, the company returned to the Nevills family when it was acquired by Nevills' daughter, Joan Nevills Staveley, and her then-husband Gaylord Staveley. Until 1969, the company maintained the tradition of ferrying passengers in the same type of wooden cataract boats Nevills originally used, but, to remain competative, ultmately converted to pontoons. Gaylord Steveley runs the company in its current incarnation as "Canyoneers, Inc."
Biographical Note Joan Woodbury graduated from the University of Wisconsin and became the first Fulbright Scholar in dance when she studied with Mary Wigman in Berlin, Germany in 1945. A retired professor of modern dance at the University of Utah where she taught for 47 years, Woodbury choreographed more than 100 works throughout her career, collaborated in the creation of 16 dance videos, and has been commissioned to choreograph by the Conservatoire National in Portugal, Outlet Dance Company in Australia, Desert Dance in Arizona, the University of Hawaii and Juillard School of Music plus many others. She has taught dance workshops and master classes throughout the United States as well as Portugal, France, Yugoslavia, China, Canada, South Africa, Puerto Rico, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, England, Ireland, Singapore and Italy. She has received grants from the National Endowment for the Arts and has been honored by organizations across the world, including the prestigious French dictionary of dance, Dictionnaire de la Danse. In 1964 Joan Woodbury founded Salt Lake City's Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company with fellow dancer and University of Utah professor Shirlie Ririe. The company has toured the world. Dedicated to educating children about the dance world, the Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company offers not only formal and informal performances but also lectures, demonstrations, workshops and classes for all age groups in dance for actors, stage production and theater lighting. Joan Woodbury and Shirlie Ririe handed the artistic direction of the company over to Charlotte Boye-Christensen in 2008.
Biographical Note John Clendenin became famous with the rise of Freestyle Skiing in the early 1970s. He was named World Freestyle Skiing Champion in 1973 and 1974, and had great impact in the inception and early days of the sport. He was inducted to the Ski Hall of Fame in 2011.
Biographical Note Allan Moll (b.1922) was born 13 June in St. Paul, Minnesota. He moved to Salt Lake City, Utah in 1934. Moll began his broadcasting career with KDYL Radio in 1941. During World War II, Moll served in the United Sates Army Air Corps from 1942 to 1945. When he returned, he went to the University of Utah law School and graduated in 1951. Moll worked as Public Affairs Director for Los Angeles radio stations KLAC from 1957 to 1960 and KHJ from 1960 to 1968. Moll worked as a news anchor on Salt Lake City's Channel 4 from 1965 to 1976. He also ran as the democratic candidate for Salt lake County Attorney. Moll has received several awards including: "Outstanding Lawyer of the Year" from the Utah State Justice Court Association, "Outstanding Lawyer of the Year" from the Brigham Young University Political and Legislative Association, and "Broadcaster of the Year" from the Utah Radio and Television Association. He is now retired.
Biographical Note Charles H. Monson Jr. was born in Salt Lake City to Charles Horald and Ortencia Merrill Monson on 13 May 1924. He married Vivian Turley in October 1947 and received his bachelor's degree the following year from the University of Utah. His master's degree was obtained a year after that, also from the University of Utah. His doctoral work, however, took him to New York and Cornell University. He received his Ph.D. in philosophy in 1952. It took Monson several years and a couple of teaching positions before returning with his family to Utah. He was an assistant professor of philosophy at the University of Nevada from 1952 to 1956 and then held the same title at Chico State College in California from 1956 to 1958. He was awarded an associate professor of philosophy position from the University of Utah in 1958, which he accepted. Monson held that position for two years until he was made an administrative intern for the American Council of Education. This took him away from Utah for a year and back to Cornell University. He returned to the University of Utah in 1966 as the deputy academic vice president. Monson remained at the university from that point on. Throughout the time Monson held administrative positions at the University of Utah, which lasted from 1966 until his death in 1974, he remained cognizant of the student body's needs by serving as a professor on top of his administrative duties. Most of the classes he taught were in philosophy and he received wide recognition for his dedication to teaching and higher education in general. He was awarded the Distinguished Teaching Award in 1970 for his outstanding teaching abilities. The numerous articles and papers he wrote were also widely distributed and his knowledge of teaching and education was often called upon, as seen by his involvement with various groups and committees. Monson was involved with the Association of California State College Instructors, the Mountain-Plains Philosophical Conference, the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, the United States Office of Education, and the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. As an administrator, Monson was able to initiate many major programs at the University of Utah. Some of these included programs for improving the status and effectiveness of teaching assistants, programs for disadvantaged students (including minority groups), and programs for women. He also established departmental advisory committees, departmental chairman leadership programs, and helped maintain the Repertory Dance Theatre, a modern dance company on campus. Charles H. Monson Jr. died on 23 October 1974 in Salt Lake City as a result of a massive pulmonary embolism. Biographical note provided by Lisa DeMille copyright 2003.
Historical Note Part of the Colorado River Storage Project (CRSP), the Flaming Gorge Dam on the Green River - a major tributary of the Colorado - holds over 3,000,000 acre-feet of water and supplies enough power to serve about 50,000 households in Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Nebraska, and Nevada. Construction of the dam began in 1958 and was completed in 1962, when the waters of the Green River began to flood Flaming Gorge Canyon and the surrounding rapids and ranchlands and affecting the ecosystem of the river. The resulting Flaming Gorge Reservoir and National Recreation Area extends from Dutch John, Utah - originally founded in 1958 as a community to house dam construction workers and future employees - into southwestern Wyoming. Once the reservoir was filled, the first power generator at Flaming Gorge Powerplant was activated by President John F. Kennedy on September 27, 1963. The dam was officially dedicated by First Lady Claudia "Lady Bird" Johnson on August 17, 1964.
Biographical Note Co-artistic directors Elizabeth and Jimmy Miklavcic founded the Another Language Performing Arts Company in 1985. Focused on creating dance-based interdisciplinary performance works, Another Language provides collaborative opportunities to artists and arts organizations to combine different art forms in innovative ways, and to broaden access to community arts education. In 1987 Beth Miklavcic returned to school, enrolling at the University of Utah to pursue a Master of Fine Arts degree in dance. Salt Lake City filmmakers with ties to the local interpretive dance scene and the University of Utah's Modern Dance Department, Elizabeth and Jimmy Miklavcic and Another Language have worked with local students, artists and art and performance organizations to produce video installations and live performances in formal settings and on Salt Lake City's streets. In 2003 they introduced "InterPlay," which they describe as "a multi-faceted event that consists of two or more performances that occur simultaneously in various cities around the world. The performances are concurrently captured, mixed, digitized, encoded and streamed onto the network. The digital mix is manipulated as each video stream can appear in any of several video playback windows. This creates a work that takes individual stories and weaves them into a multi layered, distributed, cinematic performance. InterPlay is similar to the process that the brain performs during the formulation of a dream sequence. Images that have been stored through recent experiences simultaneously emerge in pieces and the brain mixes them into a surreal sequence that loosely resembles a story. Video streams, similar to these emerging images, coming from several sites across the country and the world, are then combined into a richly woven audio-visual tapestry." InterPlay is broadcast from the University of Utah campus.
Historical Note Eestablished in 1972, the University of Utah's AirMed program was only the eigth such program in the nation. Although AirMed is based at the University of Utah Medical Center in Salt Lake City, Utah, its small fleet of helicopters and turboprop airplanes operate from locations in Salt Lake City, Park City, Orem, Ogden and Rock Springs, Wyoming.
Biographical Note John Willard Marriott (1900-1985) was born to Hyrum Willard Marriott and Ellen Morris at Marriott Settlement, Utah, September 17, 1900. He was the second of eight children and spent his early years helping with the family sheep ranching business. In 1918 he left for Connecticut and Vermont to serve a mission for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. When he returned from his mission he attended Weber College from 1920 to 1922, and later enrolled at the University of Utah. In order to pay for his education, he worked during the summers selling woolen goods to lumberjacks in the Pacific Northwest. He graduated from the University of Utah in 1926, and spent the following year teaching English and working as treasurer of Weber College. Mr. Marriott purchased the rights to sell Allen and Wright (A&W) root beer in Washington, D.C., and on May 20, 1927, he opened a root beer stand with Hugh Colton. A few weeks later he traveled back to Salt Lake City to marry Alice Sheets, June 9, 1927, in the Salt Lake Temple. After the wedding, they returned immediately to Washington, D.C., and a few weeks later they opened their second shop. By winter they realized that they would need something other than cold drinks in order to keep the business running. However, it was prohibited to sell food in A&W franchises. The Marriotts received permission from Allen and Wright to add hot food to the menu. They decided to specialize in Mexican and Southwestern food, and the chef at the Mexican embassy graciously supplied them with a few recipes. Because the Marriotts were worried about the risk of losing their patronage if they closed the shop to make the changes needed for food service, they made preparations ahead of time so that it took only one night to convert the store. They finished just in time to open the next morning as The Hot Shoppe. In 1928 Hugh Colton decided to sell his half of the business and return to Utah. The Marriotts purchased the other half of the business for $5,000.00 and they became sole owners of The Hot Shoppe. The 1930s were a time of tremendous growth for the company and the Marriott family. The Marriotts' first child, J. Willard Marriott, Jr., was born in 1932. By 1934 the corporation had added drive-in restaurants with "running boys" that provided customers with in-car service. In addition, the Marriotts had pioneered the world's first in-flight airline catering service. In 1939 the Marriotts' second son, Richard Edwin Marriott, was born. Much of the company's expansion efforts came to fruition in the 1940s and 1950s. The corporation built several new restaurants and opened numerous industrial, defense plant, and school cafeterias. A corporate recipe card system was developed and a test kitchen was built to standardize food preparation and portions. In 1957 the corporation expanded into the hotel industry with the first Marriott Motor Hotel in Arlington, Virginia. The company continued to grow under Mr. Marriott's control until 1964, when he turned over the company presidency to his son, J. Willard Marriott, Jr. Mr. Marriott continued to be heavily involved with the corporation as chairman of the board. However, corporate affairs did not wholly absorb Mr. Marriott's interest during these years. He was actively involved in religious, academic, political, and community organizations throughout his life. He played an important part in the administration of the affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Washington, D.C. In 1948 he was called to be president of the Washington Stake, a position he held until 1957, when he was appointed chairman of the General Chaplains Committee of the Mormon Church. He was actively involved with the Nauvoo Restoration Project and had a keen interest in the archaeology of the Book of Mormon. He also was instrumental in raising money for many building funds and served as an important liaison to church headquarters in Salt Lake City for the construction and dedication of the Washington, D.C. Temple. The Marriotts retained close ties with academic institutions in Utah. In 1969 they made a substantial gift to the newly opened University of Utah Library which was subsequently named the Marriott Library. They later made another generous gift, this time to Brigham Young University, for the Marriott Activities Center which was dedicated in 1973. Mr. Marriott received honorary doctorate degrees from both institutions, as well as from Weber State College. As a loyal Republican, Mr. Marriott formed close friendships in the national political arena. His list of friends included Dwight D. Eisenhower (a frequent customer of the Hot Shoppes), Richard Nixon, and Ronald Reagan. He was appointed by Nixon to chair both the 1969 and 1973 inaugural committees and served as chairman of the executive committee for Honor America Day for many years, along with committee members Billy Graham and Bob Hope. The Marriotts were life-long contributors to the Republican National Committee and supporters of George Romney and Richard Nixon's bids for the presidential nomination. Mr. Marriott also served on the board of governors for the United Service Organizations. Mr. Marriott was always held in great esteem by his colleagues. He served as president of both the Washington Restaurant Association and the National Restaurant Association, and received numerous awards in the food and lodging industries. Throughout his life, he was affiliated with many business and civic organizations including the Burning Tree Club, the Indian Creek Country Club, Bald Peak Colony Club, Columbia Country Club, Capitol Hill Club, Federal City Council, the Washington Admirals, the National Association of Manufacturers, Riggs National Bank, the American Historical and Cultural Society, American Motors Corporation, Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, and the Acacia Mutual Life Insurance Company. Mr. Marriott died of a heart attack on August 13, 1985, at his summer home in New Hampshire. Alice Sheets Marriott was born October 19, 1907, in Salt Lake City, Utah to Alice Taylor and Edwin Spencer Sheets. She graduated with honors from the University of Utah in 1927 at age 19. She was a member of Phi Kappa Phi Honor Society and Chi Omega sorority. Two days after graduation she married J. Willard Marriott in the Salt Lake Temple and moved to Washington, D.C. to help with the A&W root beer stand he had opened a few weeks before. Shortly after her arrival, they opened a second stand. Mrs. Marriott's early responsibilities included collecting accounts and taking receipts to the bank. Although the business was quite successful during the summer months, it was apparent that in the approaching winter months they would need more than root beer to keep the business afloat. Food service in the franchise was prohibited, but the Marriotts were able to secure special permission from Allen and Wright to add food to the menu. The Marriotts discussed the idea of serving Mexican and Southwestern food, but neither had any experience in food preparation of this kind. Since Mrs. Marriott had majored in Spanish in college, she was able to talk to the chef at the Mexican embassy who provided her with a few recipes and the address of a Mexican food supply house in San Antonio, Texas. Mrs. Marriott practiced cooking the recipes while Mr. Marriott made preparations to modify the stand for food service. They were determined to have everything ready in order to change the stand as quickly as possible, so they wouldn't lose their patronage. In the fall of 1927 the changes were made and the stand was transformed overnight. The Hot Shoppe was now in business, with Mrs. Marriott as the chef. In 1930, Alice Taylor Sheets, Mrs. Marriott's mother, married Senator Reed Smoot and with that marriage came the Marriotts' inclusion in the political circles of Washington, D.C. In addition to these social activities, Mrs. Marriott continued to be very involved with the business, even after the birth of their sons, J. Willard Marriott, Jr. in 1932 and Richard Edwin Marriott in 1939. She was instrumental in key decision-making which affected the company's growth and success, and even helped design and decorate company restaurants and hotels and scouted out new locations for company expansion. Mrs. Marriott's political activities were varied and extensive throughout her life. From 1955 to 1957 she served as assistant treasurer for the League of Republican Women for the District of Columbia, and in 1957 was appointed vice president of the organization, a post she held for two years. She continued to affiliate with the League of Republican Women, serving in numerous positions in subsequent years. In 1959 she was named to the District of Columbia Republican State Executive Committee. She was a member of the Republican National Committee from 1959 to 1976, and during those years she served as vice chairman and as an executive committee member. She served on the Arrangements Committee for the Republican National Conventions of 1960, 1964, 1968, and 1972, and was treasurer of the conventions in 1964, 1968, and 1972. She was vice chairman of the 1969 Inaugural Committee and honorary chairman of the 1973 Inaugural Committee. In addition to her political responsibilities, Mrs. Marriott was actively involved with various organizations in the community, including the Goodwill Industries Guild, the Capital Speakers Club, the International Neighbors Club, the Arthritis and Rheumatism Association of Metropolitan Washington, and the National Advisory Committee for Children and Youth. She also helped found the Welcome to Washington International Club. The nation's arts community has benefitted greatly from Mrs. Marriott's service and philanthropy. In 1971 she was appointed chairman of the Advisory Committee on the Arts for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, and in 1972 was appointed to the board of trustees. She is now an honorary trustee, having served two 10-year terms on the board and executive and finance committees. She has also served on the board of directors of the National Ballet Society, and is a former member of the Women's Committee of the National Symphony Orchestra. Mrs. Marriott's dedication to academic excellence has been manifest not only in her college years, but throughout her life. She holds two honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degrees, one from Mount Vernon College and one from the University of Utah. The University of Utah has been the recipient of the Marriott's support and generosity for many years. In 1989 the new dance building was dedicated as the Alice Sheets Marriott Center for Dance in recognition of her particular interest in the arts. In 1988 for the Marriott Library's twentieth anniversary, Mrs. Marriott made a sizeable donation, and in the tradition of the family, her son, J. Willard Marriott, Jr., chaired the university's capital campaign which far exceeded its goal of one hundred and fifty million dollars. At the conclusion of the campaign, the Marriott's made a significant donation to the library. Mrs. Marriott's counsel and advice have been sought by various individuals and organizations throughout her life. She is a member of the American Newspaper Women's Association, the Capitol Hill Club, the Washington Club, the 1925 F Street Club, and has been named to the honorary board of the National Committee for Prevention of Child Abuse. She serves as a member of the National Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases Advisory Council and is on the board of directors of the Arthritis Foundation. She is also an active member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Prior to Mrs. Marriott's death on April 19, 2000, she served as director emeritus of Marriott International Incorporated and Host Marriott Corporation. She served one of the longest periods of active board service in American business history.
Organizational History KUED is a Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) affiliated television station that has operated in conjunction with the University of Utah since 1958. In addition to airing nationally syndicated PBS programs KUED produces and airs television programs and documentaries made by local and regional filmmakers and about local and regional issues. KUED was the recipient of the first Rocky Mountain Emmy Award of Excellence for the Best Overall TV Station, which recognizes the station's commitment to serving the community through its productions and outreach programs. The Rocky Mountain Emmy Awards represent a division of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences that honors productions from Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming and El Centro, California. Based in Salt Lake City, Utah, KUED now broadcasts on digital channels 7.1 (KUED), 7.2 (KUED World) and 7.3 (KUED V-me, a Spanish language station).
Biographical Note Claudia Sisemore (b. 1937) earned a Bachelor of Science degree in English from Brigham Young University (BYU) in 1959 and a Masters of Fine Arts in filmmaking from the University of Utah in 1976. She has also studied painting and exhibits abstractionist paintings in oil and acrylic. A teacher of English, drama, creative writing, painting and film production, Sisemore spent fifteen years producing educational films for the Utah State Office of Education, but her primary interest is in her independent documentaries about Utah's visual and performing artists. Sisemore has filmed over twenty artists, including LeConte Stewart, Alvin Gittins, Virginia Tanner, Maurice Abravanel, Anton Rasmussen, V. Douglas Snow, Lee Deffebach, George Dibble, Larry Elsner, Connie Borup, Kathryn Stats, Ed Maryon, Bonnie Phillips, Denis Phillips, Kasiah Hancock, Francis Zimbeaux, Ted Wassmer, Randall Lake and Willam Christensen. She has also documented Utah's rich history of modern dance through productions focusing on Children's Dance Theater, Repertory Dance Theater and Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company. After retiring from the Utah State Office of Education, Sisemore formed her own production company, Canyon Video. She lives in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Biographical Note Louise Degn graduated from Utah State University in 1968 with a degree in Political Science. In 1969, at the age of 23, Degn became only the second female broadcast reporter employed Salt Lake City's KSL Television. She graduated from Northwestern University in 1970 with a Master of Science in Journalism (MSJ). In addition to her years as a reporter and at KSL (1969-1971, 1975-1982), Louise Degn worked as a news writer at Chicago's WBBM Television (1971-1973) and as an instructor at Brigham Young University (BYU) and news director of KBYU Television (1982) before returning to KSL as a producer in 1982. In 1990 Degn left KSL to teach at the University of Utah, ultimately becoming an associate professor, associate department chair and undergraduate director in the Department of Communications.
Biographical Note Poet, painter, and river guide Amil Quayle (b. 1938) is a native of Saint Anthony, Idaho and grew up playing on the banks of the Henry's Fork of the Snake River. In 1961 he ran his first river trip and worked for many years as a full-time guide, mostly in the Grand Canyon and Dinosaur National Monument for Jack Currey's Western River Expeditions headquartered in Vernal, Utah. After earning his Bachelor of Science in sociology from the University of Utah, Quayle sold his river business and ranched in Nebraska, drawing on his experience working on farms in Idaho as a teen. He earned a Master of Arts (MA) and Docotor of Philosophy (PhD) at University of Nebraska in Lincoln (UNL) and taught English for Utah State University and Idaho State University. Quayle has guided on many trips throughout his lifetime, including a pioneering descent in Mexico of the Rio Grijalva. His two sons and two of his grandchildren are river guides; five other grandchildren may follow his path. Other accomplishments include receiving the Vreeland Award, the Mari Sandoz Award, and the American Poets Award. His book Pebble Creek was published by Slow Tempo Press in 1993. His most recent collection is Grand Canyon and Other Selected Poems (Black Star Press, 2009). Amil Quayle currently lives in St. Anthony, Idaho, in a house his father built, and where he paints, reads, and in summer tends a large vegetable garden.
Biographical Note Jesse D. Jennings (July 7, 1909- August 13, 1997) was born in Oklahoma and grew up in New Mexico. As a graduate student at the University of Chicago began archaeological excavations in the Midwest and Southeast in 1929. After working several jobs for the National Park Service, including superintendent of Ocmulgee National Monument in Macon, Georgia, Jennings joined the faculty at the University of Utah, where he taught and conducted archaeological investigations from 1948 until his retirement in 1986.
Biographical Note Marvin Melville (b. 1935), is an internationally decorated and respected skier. He skied for the Granite High School, University of Utah, 1958 United States Olympic Alpine, and 1960 International Ski Federation (FIS) ski teams. In 1959, Marvin Melville became the National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) champion in downhill, slalom and combined ski events. After retiring from competition, he served a tour in the Army and then opened a ski school for young racers. Melville coached the 1964 Women's Olympic Ski Team and the University of Utah Ski Team. He was inducted into the Sports Hall of Fame in 1990.
Historical Note Under the auspices of the United Nations, 1975 was proclaimed "International Women's Year" (IWY). A world conference was held from June 23 to July 4 of that year in Mexico City. As a result of the conference, the United Nations declared a "Women's Decade," a ten-year period in which women in all parts of the world would work to gain all the rights of full citizenship. Following the Mexico conference, the United States congress established the National Commission for the Observance of International Women's Year. Women's conferences were to be held in every state before the first day of July 1977. Utah's first Coordinating Committee meeting was held in Salt Lake City in February 1977.
Historical Note Gilgal Garden was created by Thomas B. Child, Jr.(1888-1963),a bishop of the LDS church. He began creating the garden in 1947, using his skills as a mason. From 1947 to 1963 at the time of his death, Child built the garden with the help of others. Much of the focus for the twelve sculptures and more than seventy engraved stones was the Mormon religion. He chose themes like the restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood that allowed worthy men to baptize and bestow the Holy Ghost, the great Mormon migration West from Nauvoo to escape persectution, and the deep connection between the ancient Israelites and the LDS forefathers. Child's choice of naming it Gilgal Garden further describes the deep connection to his heritage. Gilgal can mean circle of sacred stone, etymologically related to the location where Joshua ordered the Israelites to place twelve stones at a memorial. After Child's death, the garden passed on to the Grant Ketzer family who cared for it and opened it to the public on Sundays. In 2000, however, after many acts of vandalism, the family decided to sell it. Hortense Child Smith, the widow of Child's son, decide to attempt to raise funds to buy and restore Gilgal Garden by creating the Friends of Gilgal Garden. Through donations by the LDS church and other large names in Utah, Friends of Gilgal Garden was able to purchase the park and begin restoration. In October of 2001, Gilgal Garden became a public park in Salt Lake City. Even now it is open to public to examine and enjoy the historical garden. Originally a private, housed in Child's backyard, the garden has grown into a popular public park where many gather to admire the sculptures created by Child. Tucked away in the middle of Salt Lake City, the garden is known for its eclectic collection of sculptures including the sphinx with Joseph Smith Jr.'s face, an altar to his wife, and Nebuchadnezzar's Dream from the Book of Daniel. It is often a site for both curious travelers and locals to see the work of Child and his creativity.
Historical Note Funded by the United States Department of Defense, the Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) was launched in 1969. The University of Utah's interface message processor run by Ivan Sutherland was one of the program's four original IMPs. The first operational packet switching network, ARPANET helped to lay the foundation for future data communications, including the internet. The project was formally decommissioned in 1990.
Karin Hodgin Jones grew up in Indiana. She earned her Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in sclupture from the University of Utah in 2003 and her Master of Fine Arts degree in studio art from the University of Illinois, Urbaba-Champaign. In 2010 she taught classes in the ArtReach Program at the Corcoran Gallery and School of Art in Washington, D.C. Specializing in three dimensional art, Jones has exhibited works all over the United States.
Biographical Note Larry Cappetto is a documentarian from Grand Junction, Colorado. A graduate of Mesa State College, Cappetto specializes in documenting the experiences of United States veterans of foreign wars with his Lest They Be Forgotten series. Most of the series' 12 volumes focus on World War II, but the series also contains episodes about American veterans of wars in Korea and Vietnam.
Biographical Note Randy Weis (b. 1975) was born in Manalapan, New Jersey. He has worked as a producer or production coordinator on numerous films since 2002, including The Illusionist (Neil Burger 2006), The Painted Veil (John Curran 2006) and Hannah Montana: The Movie (Peter Chelsom 2009) as well as several lower profile projects. Jason Todd Ipson began his career as a plastic surgery resident in Boston before resigning to attend the Peter Stark Producing Program at the University of Southern California (USC). In 2002 he directed the short "Peeping Tom." He went on to write, direct and produce his own films, including "The First Vampire: Don't Fall for the Devil's Illusions," Unrest (2006) and Everybody Wants to Be Italian (2007).
Biographical Note Donald James Angus (1887-1966) was born in Wisconsin. A self-educated electrical engineer, Angus owned the Esterline-Angus Company of Indianapolis, Indiana and worked and taught at Michigan Agricultural College in Lansing, Michigan. Angus traveled throught the Southwest, South, and Mexico and documented his trips in photographs and film.
Organizational History Ski Utah, Inc. was founded in 1978 as the marketing firm for the Utah Ski and Snowboard Association, a non-profit trade organization founded in 1975, with the aim of promoting Utah's ski and snowboard industry. The organizations represent the state's resorts, lodging, transportation, retail, restaurants and other ski or snowboard related services. Ski Utah works to create brand awareness for Utah's winter sports industry.
Biographical Note Dr. Azadeh Saljooghi grew up in Tehran, Iran. After moving to the United States of America, Saljooghi earned a Bachelor of Science (BS) degree in computer science and a Master of Science (MS) degree in applied statistics from Utah State University and a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in English literature, a Master of Fine Arts (MFA) degree in film studies and a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) degree in communication. She is an assistant professor of communications and information studies at the American University in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Biographical Note Edward Abbey (1927-1989) was born in Indiana, Pennsylvania. After attending the University of New Mexico, Abbey studied as a Fulbright scholar at Edinburgh University and as a Wallace Stegner Creative Writing Fellow at Stanford University. Abbey became a teacher, a writer, an advocate of environmentalism, and a vocal critic of public land policies. His writings, especially his novel The Monkey Wrench Gang are still used as inspiration by radical environmental groups. His book, Desert Solitaire, is a partial autobiography centering on Abbey's years as a park ranger at Arches National Monument in Utah from 1956-1957. He died March 14, 1989 at the age of 62.
Biographical Note Kelly Wilson worked in the J. Willard Marriott Library's Special Collections department 2002-2004 before graduating from the University of Utah's film studies program.
Biographical Note Philo Taylor Farnsworth (1906-1971) was born on 19 August 1906, to Lewis Edwin and Serena Bastian Farnsworth in a log cabin at Indian Creek, near the town of Beaver in Southwestern Utah. He was the namesake of his paternal grandfather who built the log home in 1856 while settling the area at the request of Mormon Church leader Brigham Young. Philo was six years old when the hand-cranked Bell telephone and Edison gramophone became well known, just old enough to become inquisitive about motors, magnets, coils, armatures, and other components of the newly popular electric power. By the time his family moved to his Uncle Albert's 240 acre ranch near Rigby, Idaho the thirteen-year-old was reading everything about electricity that he could get his hands on, including instructions to the farm's Delco power system. However, Philo's avid reading of Popular Science and other technical magazines found in the attic, soon had him using the power system to operate the family's washing machine, sewing machine, and barn lights. Philo's appetite for knowledge gave him a mental grasp of such developing concepts as Einstein's theory of relativity, sub-atomic particles, radio waves, and mechanic disc-operated television. He was also well ahead of his classmates in most math and science subjects by the time he entered Rigby High School. In fact, it was in his first chemistry class that he disclosed his idea of an "image dissector tube." Such a vacuum tube, he suggested, was capable of operating a television unit electronically by shooting a stream of electrons toward a fluorescent screen, thereby accurately reflecting pre-designated images. With the loss of his uncle's farm in 1922, Philo's family moved to Provo, Utah. For the next two years, Philo attended Brigham Young University. It was there that he was introduced to Elma "Pem" Gardner in 1924. However, just three months later, he was forced to leave school to assume the role of family provider when his father died. Farnsworth's attempts to provide support for himself and his family were many and varied during this period. He labored on logging crews, repaired and delivered radios, sold electrical products door to door, and worked on the railroad as an electrician. His acumen in math and science helped him pass the Navy's Officer Candidate School Examination, but after being assigned to Annapolis as a first-year midshipman he decided a military career was not his goal. He returned home to work on a Salt Lake City street cleaning crew. It was his knowledge of Salt Lake City's street plan that eventually earned him a supervisor position for an out-of-state charitable organization managed by George Everson and Leslie Gorrell. Everson and Gorrell were professional fundraisers from California who were impressed with Farnsworth's ability to organize a job, dedicate himself to completing the tasks involved, and motivate other team members, They listened to him recount his ideas of electronic television as they performed the mundane work of folding, stuffing, sorting, and stamping bulk mailings of fundraising letters, and became convinced of the investment possibilities such a venture could bring. So impressed were these two men with Farnsworth's knowledge of current television literature and his own innovative concepts, they offered to financially support the venture under a formal partnership know as Everson, Farnsworth & Gorrell. Three days later, on 27 May 1926, Philo and Pem were married. On 7 September 1927, George Everson watched with staff members as Farnsworth slowly turned on the controls. An unmistakable line appeared across the small bluish square of light on the end of the Oscillite tube. Although fuzzy at first, it became distinct with adjustment, and through the visual static each could see the side of a black triangle previously inserted by Pem's brother, Cliff Gardner. For the next three years support was provided by a group of bankers and investors calling themselves Crocker Research Laboratories. In March 1929, Jesse McCarger took the reins of the fledgling group, provided substantially more support and renamed the company Television, Inc. It was during this period (1929-1933), that publicity catapulted the promise of this little organization. However, with public awareness came the problems of competition, races to the patent office and legal disputes. The most significant and long-lasting conflict began in April 1930, when Dr. Vladimir Zworykin of Westinghouse visited Farnsworth's Laboratory. For three days he was a guest of the investors, who hoped to persuade Zworykin's employer to purchase their small company. But, unbeknownst to the Farnsworth staff, Zworykin had recently been hired by RCA, who sent him to the laboratory to obtain information for replicating the necessary television equipment. For the next decade Farnsworth and his attorneys were involved in court battles endeavoring to convince the United States Patent Office that it was he and not Vladimir Zworykin who had invented the basic components of electronic television. It was later to be one of Farnsworth's great professional satisfactions to have rival competitor RCA concede and pay one million dollars for rights to the Farnsworth patents. During 1933, Farnsworth acquired enough investment capital to restructure the organization and change its name to Farnsworth Television, Inc. This name remained until 1938, when management purchased the Capehart Company of Fort Wayne along with a general household utilities plant in Marion, Indiana. With these acquisitions they were prepared to compete in the blossoming radio and phonograph manufacturing market. But while endeavoring to develop and refine his electronic television invention, Farnsworth was also responsible for providing investors with saleable products during the post-depression economy and directing and supervising laboratory personnel. With the slowdown in radio and television production during the war years, Farnsworth closed down his Fort Wayne, Indiana home and moved permanently to Fernworth Farm in Brownfield, Maine. The Farnsworth Company had been converted to the production of war materials and was supplying electronic components to the federal government. With a subsidy from the Farnsworth Company, Farnsworth was able to spend more time developing ideas that had previously been dwarfed by the race for television patents. From 1939-1948 he utilized the farms lumber resources for the production of ammunition boxes for the War Production Board. The family venture was organized under the name of Farnsworth Wood Products Company and flourished for the duration of the war. Anticipating the end of the war, RCA, Philco, and several other large companies received their commercial licenses from the FCC. They immediately began retooling their equipment for the commercial manufacturing of televisions. The Farnsworth Company quickly found itself at the rear of this aggressive pack of electronics firms in the scramble for parts and materials. In addition, the one-year grace period allowed by the federal government for repayment of its wartime bank loans was up. The company found itself financially strapped and frantically tried to sell its assets in order to remain afloat in the post-war market. When all but the original plant had been sold, substantial bank loans still remained outstanding. The board of directors voted to sell the company to International Telephone and Telegraph (ITT) in 1949. Under the new management, Farnsworth retained his position as vice president of research and advance engineering. His primary function within the ITT system was to engineer his staff toward timely completion of space-age contracts awarded by the Air Force and other government agencies. During the next eighteen years he was to make ITT his home. It was within this environment that he invented components of the Defense Early Warning Signal, the PPI Projector (which allowed safe control of air traffic from the ground), an infrared telescope, submarine detection devices, radar calibration equipment, and other inventions. Although his health continued to deteriorate, he actively worked on many military research projects. Nevertheless, due to illness and the time necessary for recuperation, ITT transferred him from his responsibilities as vice president of research to that of systems consultant. As such, he was able to follow his own pursuits and still remain on the ITT payroll. Fortunately, ITT management agreed to nominally fund his new controlled fusion ideas. He and staff members invented and refined a series of fusion reaction tubes called "fusors." Publicity about his activities persuaded ITT management to raise Farnsworth's salary and promote him to the position of director of research. For Scientific reasons unknown to Farnsworth and his staff, the necessary reaction lasted no longer than thirty seconds. In December 1965, ITT came under pressure from its board of directors to terminate the expensive fusion research and sell the Farnsworth subsidiary. It was only from the urging of President Harold Geneen that the 1966 budget was accepted, permitting ITT's fusion research one additional year. However, the stress associated with this managerial ultimatum threw Farnsworth into relapse. One year later he was terminated and eventually allowed medical retirement. In the spring off 1967, Farnsworth and his family moved back to Utah to continue his fusion research at Brigham Young University, which presented him with an honorary doctorate. The university also offered him office space and an underground concrete bunker location for the project realizing the fusion lab was to be dismantled at ITT, Farnsworth invited staff members to accompany him to Salt Lake City as team members in his planned Philo T. Farnsworth Associates (PTFA) organization. By late 1968 the associates began holding regular business meetings and PTFA was underway. However, although a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was promptly secured and more possibilities were within reach, the financing needed to pay the $24,000 in monthly expenses for equipment rental and salaries was stalled. By Christmas 1970, PTFA had failed to secure the necessary financing, the Farnsworth's had sold all their own ITT stock and cashed out Philo's life insurance policy to maintain organization stability. The underwriter had failed to provide the financial backing that was to have supported the organization during its critical first year. The banks called-in all outstanding loans. Repossession notices were placed on anything not previously sold and the Internal Revenue Service put a lock on the laboratory door until delinquent taxes were paid. During January 1970, Philo T. Farnsworth Associates disbanded. Farnsworth became seriously ill with pneumonia and died on 11 March 1971. Although best known for his development of television, Farnsworth was involved in research in many other areas. He invented the first infant incubator. He was involved in the development of radar, peacetime uses of atomic energy, and the nuclear fusion process. At his death, Farnsworth held 300 U.S. and foreign patents, and Scientific American magazine called him one of the ten greatest mathematicians of his time. Elma "Pem" Gardner Farnsworth (1908- 2006) was born on 25 February 1908 in Jensen, Utah. "Pem", as she was affectionately known, married Philo Taylor Farnsworth in 1926. She became part of her husband's lab team, handling the technical drawings for his early experiments on his vision for television and was present in San Francisco on 7 September 1927, when electronic television was first demonstrated successfully. Pem Farnsworth was the first person ever to appear on a cathode-ray-tube receiver via transmission from her husband's lab and has been referred to as "The Mother of Television." During the last three decades following Philo's death, Elma Farnsworth had been a tireless advocate of her husband's work. During this period he received many posthumous honors. In 1977 he was awarded an Emmy by the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences; in 1983 his image was placed on a U.S. postage stamp; the Inventors Hall of Fame inducted him as a member in 1984. In 1990 a life-sized statue of him was placed in the Statuary Hall in Washington D.C. Elma wrote a biography on Philo It was published in 1989 with the title Distant Vision: Romance and Discovery on an Invisible Frontier. Well into her 90's Mrs. Farnsworth continued her cause and was successful in lobbying the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences to consider creating an award in honor of her husband's accomplishments. She took center stage to present the first " Philo T. Farnsworth" award for technical excellence in television at the 56th Annual Emmy Awards in Los Angeles in 2003. A devout Mormon, she derived her greatest satisfaction from meeting school children and encouraging them to follow in her late husband's footsteps. Elma died on 27 April 2006 at the age of 98
Biographical Note Edwin Brown Firmage (b.1935) teaches constitutional law and international law at the University of Utah S.J. Quinney College of Law in Salt Lake City, Utah. A Hinckley Fellow at Brigham Young University (BYU), he graduated with high honors in political science and history before earning his Master of Arts. He was National Honors Scholar at the University of Chicago Law School and served on the editorial board of the Chicago Law Review. He received the doctor of law, master of laws, and doctor of jurisprudence degrees from Chicago. Dr. Firmage served as a White House Fellow on the staff of Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, with responsibility for civil rights. In that capacity, he worked with Roy Wilkins of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and with the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. He also served as United Nations Visiting Scholar, and attended sessions of the General Assembly of the United Nations in New York and the arms control negotiations in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1970-71. He served as Fellow in Law and Humanities at the Harvard Law School in 1974-75. He received the University of Utah Distinguished Teaching Award in 1977 and the Brigham Young University Alumni Distinguished Achievement Award in 1978. The University of Utah invited Dr. Firmage to deliver the annual Reynolds Lecture, Ends and Means in Conflict, in October 1987. In 1988, Professor Firmage was awarded the Charles Redd Prize by the Utah Academy of Science, Arts and Letters, for outstanding contributions in the humanities and social sciences during the past five years. Professor Firmage was the recipient of the 1989 Governor's Award in the Humanities, given by the Utah Endowment for the Humanities. He delivered the McDougall lecture, Reconciliation, at the Cathedral of the Madeleine in Salt Lake City, Utah, on March 7, 1989. With the late Francis Wormuth, he wrote To Chain the Dog of War: The War Power of Congress in History and Law, second edition published in 1989 by University of Illinois Press. Professor Firmage's book with Collin Mangrum, Zion in the Courts: A Legal History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the first legal history of the Mormon experience in the nineteenth century, was awarded the 1989 first place prize of the Alpha Sigma Nu Book Awards for the best book of the year, given by the Honors Society of the National Association of Jesuit Colleges & Universities in the United States. His book, Religion and Law: Biblical, Jewish and Islamic Perspectives, was written with J. Welch and B. Weiss, eds., (Eisenbraun's 1990). Professor Firmage was named Samuel D. Thurman Professor of Law by the University of Utah in January 1990. He was a participant in a Fulbright Seminar in the Soviet Union during the summer of 1990, traveling throughout the country, attending lectures and meetings with Soviet governmental leaders, scholars, and leaders of emerging political parties. He worked with Vietnamese refugees in Vietnam, Thailand and Hong Kong in 1990 and 1991. Dr. Firmage was the 1991 recipient of the Rosenblatt Prize for Excellence, the highest academic award given by the University of Utah. In 1991 he was also awarded the Turner-Fairbourn Award for significant contributions to peace and justice. He delivered the Lane Lecture at Creighton University School of Law, Omaha Nebraska, 1992. Professor Firmage was a visiting professor August-December, 1992, Bentham House, University College, University of London. He taught Constitutional Law. In April of 1993, Professor Firmage gave lectures to the justice and peace representatives of the International Congregation of Men and Women Religious in Rome. Professor Firmage delivered the Kellogg Lectures in May of 1993, entitled <The Human Being: War, Peace and Faith, at the Episcopal Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Covey Oliver and Edwin B. Firmage, et al., are editors of The International Legal System, Fourth Edition, Foundation Press, New York, Spring, 1995. Dr. Firmage attended the meetings of the Subcommission on Human Rights of the United Nations, in Geneva, Switzerland, during the month of August, 1999. His speech at the Sub-Commission began debate on the topic "Toward the Creation of a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence Toward Children, 2000-2010." Following the Geneva meetings Professor Firmage enjoyed a personal audience with His Holiness, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama of Tibet, in Dharamsala, India, and later had extensive meetings with the Tibetan government-in-exile, and including members of the cabinet, legislative leaders of the government, and the Tibetan Supreme Justice Commission, on matters of constitutional revision and international relations, in September and again in November, 1999. Professor Firmage teaches constitutional law at the University of Utah. Hugh B. Brown (1883-1975) was one of the most popular twentieth-century Mormon leaders, as well as an attorney, educator, and author. Born on October 24 1883 to Homer Manley and Lydia Jane Brown in Granger Utah, he was fifteen when his family moved to Alberta, Canada. Brown went to England as a missionary, serving from 1904 to 1906. Upon returning from his missionary experiences, Brown married Zina Young Card in 1908. The couple settled in Alberta, Canada where the first six of their eight children were born. In 1912 Brown undertook military training preliminary to organizing a Latter-day Saint contingent for the Canadian armed reserves. By 1917 Brown had achieved the rank of major in the Canadian military. The Imperial military significantly influenced Brown, as shown in accounts of his service in his later writing, but he ultimately turned away from a military career. Upon returning from World War I, Brown's Canadian vocations included stints as cowboy, farmer, soldier, businessman, and head of the LDS Lethbridge Stake. Brown had studied at the Law Society of Alberta prior to his military service. Renewing an interest in law, he began working with Z. W. Jacobs, a Cardston barrister. Completing a five-year apprenticeship while working a farm he had purchased near Cardston, Brown passed the bar examination and was admitted to the bar in 1921. Moving to Salt Lake City in 1927, Brown quickly became a successful lawyer and president of the LDS Granite Stake. He also formed a lifelong allegiance with the Democratic party, which led to an unsuccessful run for political office and an unpleasant term of service as first chairman of Utah's Liquor Control Commission from 1935 to 1937. A call to head the LDS British Mission came soon, the first of many full-time church positions which brought him admiration and influence, but never the affluence for which he also yearned. As LDS Servicemen's Coordinator from 1941 to 1945, he traveled extensively in North America and western Europe as de facto chief chaplain for the thousands of Mormons in American, British, and Commonwealth uniforms; anecdotes born of this experience punctuated his sermons and writings thereafter. Early in 1944 he was given an additional appointment to reactivate the British Mission. Intervals as a professor of religion at Brigham Young University (1946-1949), and with an Alberta oil prospecting firm (1949-1953), preceded his call, at age seventy, to be one of the LDS General Authorities - an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve. Thereafter he became a member of the Council of the Twelve in 1958, and Counselor to and then Second Counselor in the First Presidency in 1961, becoming First Counselor in 1963. His record of earlier service, his effective writings and sermons, and his long friendship and ideological affinity with LDS Church President David O. McKay probably accounted for his rapid advancement in the church hierarchy. McKay's failing health and his own policy differences within the church leadership later weakened Brown's influence, though his popularity remained great. Following McKay's death in 1970, he served in the Council of the Twelve until his own death, two years after Zina's, on 2 December 1975.
Biographical Note Craig Brandon Wirth (b.1952) was born and raised in Montana. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree (BA) in Broadcast Journalism from the University of Utah in 1974, and a Masters of Arts degree (MA) in Urban Affairs Journalism from the University of Wisconsin in 1976. He has worked in many capacities in broadcast journalism, primarily as a feature reporter, at broadcasting stations in Salt Lake City (KCPX-TV, KUTV, KTVX-TV), Milwaukee (WTMJ AM-TV), New York (WOR-TV), and Los Angeles (KCBS-TV, KCAL-TV). He was a feature reporter on ABC's Good Morning America. He also has worked in cable broadcasting. He was a Los Angeles Bureau Reporter on CNBC. He was a Traveling Correspondent and Co-Host of American Entrepreneur for the Financial News Network. He was the Host and Co-Executive Producer for Famous Footsteps on the Travel Channel. In recognition of his outstanding feature reporting and writing, Craig Wirth has been nominated for seven New York and Los Angeles Emmy Awards, winning four, two for his 1985 feature Why New Jersey Has No State Song, one for a 1987 feature Turkeys, and one for a 1985 feature Punk Hair Cut. He also won four ABC Affiliates Americana Feature Contest Awards, and four Ace National Cable Awards, two for Best Program Host (American Entrepreneur) in 1990 and 1991, and two for Best Documentary (Rubles to Riches and Berlin Reborn) in 1990. He was the University of Utah Department of Communications "Outstanding Alumni" of 1992, and the University of Wisconsin Journalism School's "Outstanding Young Alumni" of 1986. He received the California Associated Press Mark Twain Award in Writing in 1986. He was an instructor at the University of Utah and Westminster College (1977-1981), a Visiting Lecturer in Broadcast Journalism at the University of Wisconsin (1983), and a Senior Lecturer in Journalism at the University of Southern California (1988-1990). Craig Wirth co-owned and served as President of Wirth/Salomon Productions of New York City, and also co-owned KCNY Radio of Moab (1978-1987).
Biographical Note Marie Barker Nelson (b. 1926) grew up in Salt Lake City, Utah, where she studied piano with Becky Almond and Gladys Gladstone. She graduated from the University of Utah with a major in music, and later received a degree from the Yale School of Music where she studied with renown composer Paul Hindemith. She earned her Master of Arts under the guidance of LeRoy Robertson and her Ph.D. under Ramiro Cortés and Vladimir Ussachevsky at the University of Utah. Maurice Abravanel was instrumental in bringing about the first performance of Nelson's tone poem The Medead by the Utah Symphony in 1977. Another work, Once in Israel was premiered by the Pro Musica chorus and orchestra. Among her other works are five musical plays for children which have been performed by the Pioneer Children's Theater, and also two adult musicals, Someone who Cares, and Porter. Her string quartet has been performed at UCLA as well as in Salt Lake City , and she was a first place winner in the Utah State Fair composition competition. Nelson has composed numerous songs including arrangements of I Wonder and I Wander and Mary's Lullaby, and a commissioned work, Gloria for mixed chorus and organ, all introduced at Pro Musica's Christmas concerts in Salt Lake City. In 1992 she had several performances of her Sonata for Trombone and Piano (at the Contemporary Music Consortium) and a song cycle commissioned by the Salt Lake Vocal Ensemble, entitled Song of the Goddesses. She currently works with Bruce Reich.
Biographical Note Lyle Barber Nelson (1949-) was born in McCall, Idaho on February 9, 1949. He graduated from the United States Military Academy in 1971 with a degree in engeineering; he left the military with the rank of captain in 1977. He later earned an Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree from the University of Southern California and a Doctor of Pholosophy (PhD) degree in human deveopment from the Fielding Institute. Nelson returned to McCall, Idaho and became the program director for Integrative Medicine at McCall Memeorial Hospital. A highly decorated athlete, Lyle Nelson won thirteen United States and North American championships during his career as a biathlete. He competed in biathlon in four Olympic Winter Games from 1976-1988 and carried the United States of America team flag during the opening ceremonies for the 1988 Calgary games. Nelson also competed in the National Broadcasting Company (NBC) televised endurance challenge Survival of the Fittest and won that competition in 1984. In 2006 the Nordic and showshoe track at Idaho's Tamarack Resort was dedicated in his name. In 2012 Nelson was inducted into the Intermountain Ski Hall of Fame at the Alf Engen Ski Museum in Park City, Utah.
Biographical Note Jerry Dixon earned Bachelor of Arts degrees from the University of Utah in 1970 and 1973. An extreme sports, outdoors and travel enthusiast, Dixon currently participates in the University of Utah's Environmental Humanities Graduate Program by helping students travel to locations like Brazil, Costa Rica, Moose, Wyoming and Castle Valley, Utah to study what Environmental Humanitites Dean Robert Newman describes as "our relationship and responsibility to life on our planet, from environmental degradation and their consequences in human dispossession, species extinction, and sustainability as well as in ethical, health, and public policy concerns."
Biographical Note David Baddley holds Bachelor of Fine Arts and Master of Fine Arts degrees from the University of Utah. His art focuses on action based land art and photography, but he has also worked with film, video, concept work and performance. Baddley has exhibited work in galleries worldwide, and his art and writings have appeared in publications including ArtWeek, Leica View and LensWork. A book of his photographs, Peace, was recently published by the Center for Documentary Arts. David Baddley is an associate professor of art at Westminster College in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Biographical Note Jimi Jones is a filmmaker and film archivist. In addition to creating experimental films and documentaries, Jones has worked in the Audio-Visual Archive in the Special Collections Department at the University of Utah's J. Willard Marriott Library.
Biographical Note Seth Hubbard was born in Cedar City, Utah and grew up in Pilot Station, Alaska, a village of the native Y'Upik people. He is the brother of fellow Utah artist and filmmaker Jenevieve Hubbard.
Biographical Note Born and raised in Connecticut, Nate Millard moved to Utah in 1997 to pursue snowboarding, and school. While snowboarding on a regular basis, he would meet his now wife, Bree, who was also riding for various snowboard companies and competing nationally. He picked up the art of photography from Bree, who was going to school for a Bachelor of Arts in Fine Arts Photography. Nate began working as a freelance photographer in the early part of the century, and has been published in a number of publications locally, and worldwide, as well as producing, co-filming, and editing two local videos, "Crew Cuts", and "No Sugar Added". Bree and Nate continue to ride and shoot snowboarding together for Brighton Resort, as Brigtown Chronicles. Biography written by Josh Scheuerman.
Organizational History Spy Hop Productions is a not-for-profit youth media center specializing in educational solutions through the multimedia arts. Their mission is to cultivate the visions and voices of an emerging generation - via the big screen, the airwaves, and the world-wide-web. Founded in 1999 by Utah natives Rick Wray and Erik Dodd, Spy Hop Productions was created with a vision to empower underserved youth through multimedia arts education and to meet the demands of the community for after-school programming that helps prepare young people for the digital future. With their experience and expertise in education, multimedia production and business management, Mr. Wray and Mr. Dodd successfully developed the organization from a two-person operation to one that now serves over 600 young people a year and employs over 25 full and part-time employees. In collaboration with community partners such as the Mayor's Office Youth City Program, the Sundance Institute, the University of Utah Youth Education, the Boys and Girls Club, ArtStart Rowland Hall St. Marks, Art Kids, and the Kennedy Center Imagination Celebration of Salt Lake City, Spy Hop Productions provides a creative and dynamic studio environment where young people of all backgrounds actively engage in the production of their own narratives and solutions to the challenges they face. The young participants involved in Spy Hop's programs have worked with mentors and instructors in multiple media arts disciplines including documentary arts, film and video production, radio, web design, 3D graphics, and animation. In 2004, the young producers' creative works reached local and national audiences exceeding two million people.
The Utah Scottish Association was formed to celebrate and promote the customs, civilization, and achievement of Scottish heritage. Utah Scottish Association Annual events throughout the year include lectures, demonstrations, displays and other activities to help Scots, Scottish-Americans, Scotland lovers and their descendants learn more about, and participate in, their Celtic culture. Frederick S. Buchanan was born in Stevenson, Ayrshire Scotland in 1931. In 1949 he moved to Utah with his parents. Between 1951 and 1953 Buchanan served a Church of Jesus Christ of Lattery Day Saints (L.D.S.) mission in Great Britain and was later drafted into the United States Military. After his release from the army, Buchanan attended the University of Utah where he received his undergraduate and graduate degrees. Buchanan also attended Ohio State University where he earned his Ph.D. in Education on 1967. Buchanan taught history and literature at Bountiful High School and the University of Toledo. Buchanan was later appointed to the University of Utah's Graduate School of Education where he taught the history of education until his retirement in June of 1996.
Biographical Note Helen B. Andelin (1920-2009) was born Helen Berry in Mesa, Arizona. A devout member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Helen Berry attended Brigham Young University, where she met and married Aubrey Passey Andelin (1918-1999). Hoping to share the secret of her own happy marriage with other women, Helen Andelin began teaching marriage enrichment classes and wrote and initially self published her controversial book, Fascinating Womanhood. Emphasizing traditional domestic roles for women, Andelin's teachings conflicted with other women's movements of the era; however, the Fascinating Womanhood movement gained a strong following which is still alive today. Andelin continued to be active in the movement until her death in 2009.
Biographical Note Fawn McKay Brodie (1915-1981) was born Fawn McKay in Ogden, Utah and grew up in nearby Huntsville. She earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in English Literature from the University of Utah in 1934 and in 1936 completed a Master of Arts degree at the University of Chicago, where she met and married Bernard Brodie. After graduation began researching the history of the Book of Mormon and, in 1945, published No Man Knows My History: The Life of Joseph Smith, which resulted in her 1946 excommunication from Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. After publishing two more biographies, Thaddeus Stevens: Scourge of the South (1959) and The Devil Drives: A Life of Sir Richard Burton (1967), Brodie began to teach history and American political biography at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA). Thomas Jefferson: An Intimate History was published in 1974 and Richard Nixon: The Shaping of His Character in late 1981, nine monts after her death from lung cancer earlier that year.
Biographical Note Professor Heber Bowman Hawkes (1934-1983) was a nationally recognized figure in the geology field. He was a former geography professor and founder of the Geology Department at the University of Utah.
Biographical Note Mario DeAngelis studied film at the University of Utah. He is an active producer, director and editor in the Utah film industry and the maker of documentary and narrative films. DeAngelis is the director of Salt Lake City's Salty Horror Film Festival, which accepts short and feature film, screenplays, trailers and music in the horror and science fiction horror genres from amateur and professional filmmakers of all ages.
Historical Note Groundbreaking for the Flaming Gorge Dam began in 1958, and the structure was completed in 1964. The resulting Flaming Gorge Reservoir extends through 91 miles of the Green River and flooded the land that the Williams family ranch previously sat on. The dam was built and is operated by the United States Bureau of Reclamation.
Biographical Note Alf Engen (1909-1997) was born in Mjondallen, Norway, the oldest of three boys. Engen's father died when he was only nine years old, but he had already implemented the joy of skiing into the hearts of his sons, Alf, Sverre and Corey (Kaare). The boys learned to ski jump at a young age and became well known for thier Nordic ability in their homeland. In 1929 Engen immigrated to the United States with his younger brother, Sverre. They Initialy settled in Chicago where they joined the American-Norwegian Athletic Club. He and several club members traveled to Westby, Wisconsin to participate in a ski jumping meet. With his first jump in the Westby Nordic event, Engen broke the world's record for distance ski jumping and was invited to tour the North American Nordic circuit with professional jumpers. In 1931 he settled in Salt Lake City, Utah. His youngest brother, Corey, and their mother immigrated to the United States in 1933 and the three Engen Brothers travled the United States as professional jumpers, breaking Nordic records and gaining recognition everywhere they went. In 1937, Engen married Evelyn Pack, regained his amateur standing, and ranked among the top Nordic skiers in the world. He helped in planning and developing around thirty ski areas in Utah, Nevada, Idaho, and Wyoming while working for the United States Forest Service as a winter sports advisor. In 1938 he was invited to represent the Sun Valley Ski Club in Nordic jumping. While living in Idaho, he taught himself how to Alpine ski and spent time off the slopes preforming in several movies and newreels. In 1940, he finished first in the National Four-way in Seattle, Washington. Engen assisted with the operation and ski lessons at Alta and Snow Basin Ski Schools during the 1945-46 ski season and later returned to Utah to direct the Alta Ski School, the Little Mountain Ski School, and the Deseret News Free Ski School after coaching the United States Olympic Ski Team in 1948. He received the Skier's Hall of Fame Award in 1956. Alf Engen died in 1997 at the age of 88.
Biographical Note Suzy Harris Rytting (b. 1930) began her early skiing outings at Alta at age 13. She started representing Alta and her high school in ski racing two years later. From the mid 1940s though the early 1950s, Suzy cut a swath through the American ski racing scene as one of the finest women racers in the country. A two time winner of Alta's prestigious Snow Cup race in both 1947 and 1948, she also won the Mary Cornelia National Collegiate Trophy in 1947 and set a course record in Sun Valley's Gold Sun Downhill Race in 1948. She was named an alternate on the U.S. Women's Olympic Ski Team in 1948 and named to the 1950 U.S. Women's International Ski Federation (FIS) world championship ski team and the United States Winter Olympic Ski Team in 1952. Following her ski racing career, Suzy became Secretary for the Intermountain Ski Association, a position she held from 1952 through 1959. From 1967 through 1972, she served as coach for the United Alta Skiers Junior Racing Team (ages 10-18). Throughout her lifetime, Suzy has distinguished herself by active participation in numerous ski-related and community affairs. She currently serves as a docent, along with her husband, Bill, at the Alf Engen Ski Museum. She also continues to be a life long supporter of Alta and gives periodic ski history presentations at Alta's "Fireside Chat" program, sponsored by the Alta Historical Society. Suzy was elected to the U.S. National Ski Hall of Fame in 1988; the Utah Sports Hall of Fame in 1988; the University of Utah Athletes Crimson Club Hall of Fame in 1991; and in 1999 was named one of Utah's "50 Greatest Athletes of the 20th Century." In 2004, Suzy Harris Rytting was also inducted into the Intermountain Ski Hall of Fame and received the S.J. Quinney Award for "enhancing the image and popularity of skiing in the region" by the J. Willard Marriott Library Ski Archives. Biography from the Alta Historical Society.
Biographical Note Robbin Shahani eared a Bachelor of Arts degree in dance and a Master of Fine Arts degree in film studies at the University of Utah. After completing his education Shahani began his career directing and producing television commercials for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the Adoption Exchange, the State of Utah, and Fisher Price. He later moved to Los Angeles to work as a director of television documentaries. His films can be seen on Discovery Channel, PAX and GSN. Robbin Shahani has received grants from the Salt Lake City and Utah Arts Council and the Kodak Filmmakers Grant and has won the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences national editing competition as well as awards from film festivals across the country. Before moving into film and television, Robbin enjoyed a career as a ballet dancer with national companies such as Boston Ballet and Ballet West. He is currently the executive director of the California Dance Academy.
David Pierpont Gardner (b. 1933) received his Bachelor of Science from Brigham Young University (BYU) in 1955, his M.A. from the University of California at Berkeley in 1959, and his Ph.D. from the University of Utah in 1966. He is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, member of the National Academy of Education, and a member of the American Philosophical Society. Following his tenure as President at the University of Utah from 1973-1982, he became President of the University of California from 1983-1992. From 1993 to 1999, he was the president of the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation. More recently, he served as the chairman of the Board of Trustees of the J. Paul Getty Trust from 2000 to 2004. Now in his retirement, he remains an active supporter of education.
Biographical Note Jenevieve Hubbard was born in Cedar City, Utah, but her family moved to Pilot Station, Alaska when she was three years old and her brother, fellow Utah filmmaker Seth Hubbard, was two years old. A village of the native Y'Upik people, Pilot Station infused Hubbard's upbringing with what she describes as a "woven experience of the integration of native culture and western ideals." From 2002-2005, Hubbard studied at the University of Utah were she was awarded the Grace Durkee Meldrum Scholarship and earned a degree in painting and drawing. In 2005 Hubbard joined the Artificial Art Institute, an art collective stationed in a 100-year-old hospital, where she met many influential artists. She married painter John O'Connell in 2006. Hubbard's art has been featured in galleries, newspapers and online; her work has been reviewed and discussed in the Salt Lake Tribune, the Awkward Hour (a cult scene underground podcast), 15 Bytes and the City Weekly. It has been exhibited at Kayo Gallery, Maridadi Gallery, Charley Hafen Gallery and the Utah Cultural Celebration Center. In 2009 she received an Award of Merit at the Celebrating the Diversity of Women Show at the Utah Cultural Celebration Center, which was juried by Apsara C. DiQuinzo, Assistant Curator of Painting & Sculpture at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. Hubbard's body of work includes a series of totemic industrial paintings using soil, tea, ink and acrylic paint inspired by "the elemental themes of her childhood, drawing from indigenous mythologies and reflecting her attempts to navigate the spiritual fall-out of a disconnected and isolated modern existence." Her latest work centers on fingerprint imagery and explores "the more personal side of the fingerprint in the form of touch, influence, the human history of place and the positive creative potential of a life."
Biographical Note Dale E. Winn was born 23 November 1917 in Tooele, Utah. He graduated from the University of Utah with an English major. Before the war he worked in the smelter and as a traveling salesman for a knit dress company. He was drafted in 1941, serving in Australia, New Guinea and at Fort Still, Oklahoma. He returned to Tooele after the war and took up a position at the post office, where he would remain for the rest of his working career. Winn died of kidney failure in 1999. Winn was an avid explorer, and spent a great deal of his time amongst the outdoors. He was an expert camper, with a love for photography and writing. Affectionately nicknamed "Unk the desert Rat" by his family, he had a knack for storytelling around the campfire. Winn wished to be a published author, at one point self-publishing his military memories of World War Two entitled "Suntan and Fatigue". Winn was continually gathering new experiences, participating in archeology digs in the desert, taking climbing lessons in the Teton Mountains and running numerous rivers in the midwest.
Biographical Note Idaho native Ken Sleight began running rivers in Utah in the 1950s. After serving in the Korean War and working as a bookeeper for Firestone Tires, Sleight relocated his family to Southern Utah and started his own rafting company, Wonderland Expeditions. Inspired in part by the flooding of his beloved Glen Canyon, Sleight became a vocal environmental activist intent on protecting the Southern Utah landscapes he loved from further development. In 1967, Sleight met and befriended fellow activist and author Edward Abbey and may have provided the inspiration for the Monkey Wrench Gang character, Seldom Seen Smith. Sleight currently owns the Pack Creek Ranch ourside Moab, Utah.
Biographical Note Channing Lowe (b. 1970) is a Sandy, Utah filmmaker who has produced, directed and written several short and feature length films in the horror genre. In addition to making movies with his production company, Evolutionary Pictures, Lowe teaches film classes at Salt Lake Community College.
Historical Note Thomas Battersby Child, Jr. (1888-1963) was the creator of Gilgal Garden. Starting in 1945, at the age of fifty-seven, he began working on Gilgal Garden with the help of few people. Using stone from all over Utah, he built twelve sculptures and over seventy engraved stones. Through his dedication to the church, Gilgal Garden came to show important themes including the restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthood that allowed worthy men to baptize and bestow the Holy Ghost, the great Mormon migration West from Nauvoo to escape persectution, and the deep connection between the ancient Israelites and the LDS forefathers. Up until his death in 1963, Child's worked devotedly on Gilgal Garden. After his death, the Grant Fetzer family bought the garden and maintained it until 2000 when they attempted to sell it. Through the dedication by the Friends of Gilgal Garden, enough money was raised to buy the garden and reopen it as a city park. Friends of Gilgal have worked since 2000 to continue preservation and restoration by raising funds to continue their work. Located in Salt Lake City, Utah, the park is accessible everyday as a place to wander and explore the work of Child and experience the wonders of the garden. Gilgal Garden, spanning half an acre, offers many tourist and locals an interesting view of Child's creativity and devotion. Using a variety of stones from around Utah, Child created a tranquil space filled with many Mormon tributes like the sphinx with Joseph Smith Jr.'s face and other biblical allusions like Nebuchadnezzar's Dream from the Book of Daniel. Besides themes of Mormonism, Child has included an altar to his wife and a statue of himself with brick pants, often mentioned as a key point in Gilgal Garden. Child also carved a thirty foot rock in relief with a heavenly messenger with an unsheathed sword. Through exploration of the garden, many can find hidden sculptural treasures that reveal the beauty and eccentricities of Child's garden.
Biographical Note Rick Reese grew up in Salt Lake City, Utah, where he spent countless hours climbing with friends in the Wasatch Mountains. He is an experienced mountineer. He was a climbing ranger in Grand Teton National Park in the 1960s and has served as director of Community Relations at the University of Utah, co-chair of the Bonneville Shoreline preservation group, director of the Yellowstone Institute and founder the Greater Yellowstone Coalition.
Biographical Note Maud May Babcock (1867-1954) was Utah's first lady of the theater and of physical education. She founded the University of Utah departments of speech and of physical education, and during her lifetime she personally produced more than 300 plays. Babcock was born in East Worchester, New York. She received a BA degree from Wells College and a Bachelor of Elocution degree from the National School of Oratory of Philadelphia. She also studied at the Lyceum School of Acting (now the American Academy of Dramatic Arts) in New York, at the University of Chicago, and also for two years in London and Paris. After beginning her career teaching at Ingleside School for Girls in Connecticut, she moved on to Rutgers College and New York public schools before coming to Utah in 1892 at the invitation of Susa Young Gates. Gates had attended one of Babcock's summer classes at Harvard and she persuaded her to come to Utah as a professor of oratory and speech at the Social Hall. "Miss B," as her students affectionately called her, taught at the Social Hall in the mornings and at Brigham Young Academy in the afternoons. She soon became an instructor in elocution and physical culture at the University of Utah, the first woman on the faculty. She formed the University Dramatic Club, whose first production was "Eleusinia." Under her direction the University of Utah thus became the first university in the country to produce a stage play. By 1938, when Babcock retired, the club had the longest unbroken record of annual performances of any university drama club in North America. Babcock worked her way up from instructor to full professor by 1904; she became chair of the department of speech in 1927. From 1918 to 1922 she also was the impetus behind the first university-subsidized professional theater in the United States at the Social Hall. Babcock authored numerous books relating to the fields of speech and elocution, and she served as president of the National Association of Teachers of Speech. She served for twenty years (twelve years as President) on the board of the Utah School for the Deaf and Blind. She also was active in planning and building the Deseret Gym. For twelve years she served as chaplain of the Utah Senate, the first woman in the country to hold such a position. She died 31 December 1954 after a long illness. Edmund Gail Plummer (1899-1964) was born in Daniel, Washington County, Utah, the son of Walter and Josephine Plummer. He received his Bachelor of Arts (BA). from Brigham Young University in 1927, and his Master of Arts (MA) from the University of Utah in 1935. He was a speech instructor at the University of Utah and the manager of Kingsbury Hall from 1933 to 1957. Kingsbury Hall was dedicated in 1930 following the closing of the Salt Lake Theater in 1928. Maud May Babcock recommended Plummer for the job of manager, and the University Dramatic Club had a home. The building was an independent department, serving the campus and the community. Each year a freshman play, a varsity play, and productions sponsored by Theta Alpha Phi were performed, as well as big musical productions for the summer festivals. Gail Plummer married Elva Swindle, who helped work for the theater, balancing books and selling tickets for ten years. They had two children, Bonnie and Tom. Plummer managed the Utah State Symphony as well, for two years starting in 1944. He worked closely during his career with symphony conductor Maurice Abravanel, dance instructor Willam Christensen, director C. Lowell Lees, and actor and stage designer Vern Adix. Through his success with the theater and his support for the public library, Gail Plummer earned respect in the community as a person bringing culture, art, and education to Utah. His book, The Business of Show Business (1961), gives a detailed account of his years of work with the theater. It is available in the Marriott Library's circulating collection. Gail Plummer died 23 October 1964, just before the new public library he inspired was ready to open.
Biographical Note Alton "Al" Morton (1905-1985) bought his first 8mm camera with money earned as a Salt Lake City area mail carrier, his first steady job after the Great Depression. In 1942, Morton helped to found the Utah Cine Arts Club, an organization of amateur filmmakers whose members participated in a national culture of art, innovation and exchange predating the independent film movements of New Hollywood and the 1960s. Like other members of the Utah Cine Arts club and similar organizations across the country, Morton invented his own cinematic tools - splicers, tripods, waterproof camera housings, etc. - to help him turn his favorite hobbies into complex narrative films. An avid boater and river runner, Al Morton transformed river trips with his friends, notable river guides like Don Harris and Jack Brennan, into carefully edited cinematic adventures that screened at public venues in the Salt Lake Valley and at other cinema clubs across the nation. Al Morton was named a Fellow of the Amateur Cinema League in 1946.
Biographical Note Dr. Richard Stadler (b.1940) is a professor of history at Weber State University in Ogden, Utah where he has been teaching courses in American and Utah History since 1969. He is also dean of the College of Social and Behavioral Sciences and a member of the Utah State Board of Education for District 4. During his career, he has served as president of the Utah School Boards Association, the Mormon History Association and the Utah Academy of Sciences, Arts and Letters. As an authority on Utah history, Dr. Stadler has edited the Journal of Mormon History and Utah State Historical Quarterly and co-authored other locally relevant historical publications including, A History of Weber County, Utah, the Right Place: The Official Centennial History, The Weber River Basin: Grass Roots Democracy and Water Development and Ogden: Junction City. In 1985 he delivered a paper on author and historian Fawn McKay Brodie at Weber State's Ogden Writers Series.
Historical Note In 1994 veteran river runners joined scientists from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and a group of historians and archivists on an expedition down the Colorado River. The participants discussed and compared environmental and experiential changes before and after the construction of Glen Canyon Dam and documented their findings with photographs, rephotography to document environmental impacts, and oral histories detailing past experiences on the river. The USGS's Robert H. Webb, Theodore S. Melis, and Richard A. Valdez noted lower water temperatures, fewer sediment-laden flows, sand bar erosion, invasion of non-native tamarisk trees, reduction in driftwood, development of marshes, increase in non-native fish at the expense of native fishes, and increase in water bird populations. Additionally, they found evidence suggesting increases in the frequency of debris flows in the Grand Canyon, decreases in bat populations, and higher swallow and bighorn sheep populations. Perhaps more significantly, the observations and experiences gained from the trip and interviews help offer additional perspectives for Colorado River management. (From the Cline Library).
Biographical Note Keith B. Farr worked as an announcer for KLO 1430 Radio Ogden between 1959 and 1961. He hosted the "Sandman Serenade" program which aired from 12 midnight to 6am, Mountain Standard Time. His program was broadcast through out the central and western United States and into parts of Canada. After his time at KLO, he worked for KVOG-TV, Salt Lake City in 1961, and then KIFI-TV, Idaho Falls, Idaho in 1963 and finally KWIN/KCVR, Stockton, California between 1968 and 1990. He now resides in Lodi, California and continues to be involved in radio by doing research and documenting early AM radio and announcer time-lines.
Historical Note Before it was flooded by the rising waters of Lake Powell, Glen Canyon was a popular river running and destination. Led by guides like Albert "Bert" Loper, boaters experienced redrock canyons and Anasazi ruins alongside the Colorado River. Born in Missouri in 1869, Loper traveled west to the rivers of the Desert Southwest, where he spent the majority of his life in his adopted hometown of Green River, Utah. In 1916 Loper and Ellsworth Kolb became the first people to boat through Utah's Westwater Canyon. In 1920 Loper served as lead boatman for teh United States Geological Survey (USGS) mission to find a location for the future Hoover Dam. In 1939, at the age of 69, Loper ran every rapid in the Grand Canyon with fellow riverman Don Harris. He died in 1949 at the age of 79 when he flipped his self-made boat in the Grand Canyon's Marble Gorge. Glen Canyon Dam was dedicated in 1966.
Biographical Note Leroy J. Robertson (1896-1971) was born in Fountain Green, Utah, on 21 December 1896, the son of Utah-born Mormon parents. His first musical experiences were simple and personal--he fashioned tunes on a homemade fiddle and played by ear on the parlor organ in his home. In grammar school, after a few rudimentary music lessons, he organized a small orchestra of young friends and taught them to play music of his own devising. He graduated from the New England Conservatory of Music in boston under George Whitefield Chadwick in 1923. His later studies were under Ernest Bloch in San Francisco and in Roveredo Capriasca, Switzerland; Hugo Leichtentritt in Berlin; and Arnold Schoenberg in Los Angeles. He received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from Brigham Young University (BYU) and Ph.D. degree from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles. He was professor and chairman of the music department at BYU; lecturer of composition at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and professor and chairman of the music department at the University of Utah from 1948 until his retirement in 1964. Upon retirement, Robertson received the first Distinguished Research Professorship at that institution. Robertson was an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa; a fellow of the Utah Academy of Arts, Sciences, and Letters; a member of the Executive Music Committee of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and a member of the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishrs (ASCAP). Robertson's compositions include works for chamber music and orchestra; concertos for violin, cello, and piano; solos, vocal, and instrumental; choral compositions and an "Oratorio from the Book of Mormon" for chorus, soloists, organ, and orchestra. While the Reichhold prize for his "Trilogy" was by far the most impressive, Robertson has a long list of other awards to hs credit. In 1923, he won the Endicott prize for his "Overture in E Minor"; his "Quintet in A Minor for Piano and Strings" won first place in a contest conducted by the Society for Publicaiton of American Music in 1936; his "String Quartet" was chosen by the Critics Circle in New York in 1944; and his "Rhapsody for Piano and Orchestra" was given an award by the Utah Institute of Fine Arts in 1945. He received the National Federation of Music Clubs Award of Merit in 1959. Robertson died on 25 July, 1971 in Salt Lake City.
Historical Note YourStory was founded in 2004 by Professor Meg Brady of the Department of English and the Ethnic Studies Program at the University of Utah. The project is an effort to record the life stories of all Utahns. YourStory has recording studios across the Wasatch Front, including the Chase Home Museum of Folk Art in Liberty Park and the Huntsman Cancer Institute and offers its services to "every Utahn, no matter how ordinary, [who] has a story to tell."
Biographical Note Peter L. Goss, Ph.D. (b. 1943) is a professor of architectural history and associate vice president for scholarly and creative activities at the University of Utah. His specialties include the Arts and Crafts Movement, American Suburbia, Utah architecture, the vernacular architecture of the American West, and the Prairie School architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright, which was popularized in Utah in part by Wright's associate, Utah architect Taylor Woolley. Norman Hill was an engineer who worked with Wright and Woolley.
Historical Note Even before 1900, miners, mail carriers and other travelers were using skis to traverse Utah's mountain snow, and it was not long before skiing in the state arose as a recreational activity and spectator sport. The Wasatch Mountain Club formed and began leading ski treks in 1912, and, in 1915, the Norwegian Young Folks Society began organizing ski jumping competitions at Ogden's Becker Hill and along the Wasatch Front. By 1936, the resort town of Brighton featured the state's first rope tow and hosted ski races, and it was only a short time after Joe Quinney formed the Salt Lake City Winter Sports Association in 1937 that Utah's first chairlift (only the second in the country) was constructed at the former alpine mining town of Alta in 1938. In the 1940s, Norwegian ski jumper Sverre Engen became Alta's first ski patrolman and the Forest Service's first snow ranger, while his equally accomplished older brother, Alf, took over Alta's ski school. As skiing continued to increase in popularity, organized ski areas sprung up throughout the Wasatch Mountains and in alpine areas across the state, attracting recreational and competitive skiers from local communities and around the world. Salt Lake City hosted the Winter Olympic Games in 2002. The Utah Ski Archives was established in 1989 to preserve a comprehensive history of skiing in Utah and the Intermountain region. They are housed at the University of Utah J. Willard Marriott Library in the Special Collections department and consist of photographs, manuscripts and audio-visual material.
Organizational History The Madera Employment Training Center is a professional training school in Madera, California operated by the Education and Technical Services Division under contract with the Bureau of Inadian Affairs, United States Department of Interior.
Organizational History The American West Center is a research center at the University of Utah which is affiliated with the College of Social and Behavioral Science. The Center is dedicated to providing educational and curricular support to Indian tribes, school districts, other interested organizations, and the general public through consultations, research, and publications.
Organizational History The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) was formed in 1824. An agency of the federal government of the United States within the US Department of the Interior, it is responsible for the administration and management of land held in trust by the United States for Native Americans in the United States, Native American Tribes and Alaska Natives.
Organizational History Ballet West is a professional ballet company founded in 1963 by Utah's "First Lady of the Arts" Glenn Walker Wallace and Willam F. Christensen, founder of the University of Utah's ballet department and Ballet West's first artistic director. The company has subsequently been led by artistic directors Bruce Marks, John Hart, Jonas Kåge and Adam Sklute. In addition to its annual season of performances at the Capitol Theatre in downtown Salt Lake City, Utah, Ballet West has toured the world several times with its classical ballet performances.
Biographical Note Richard "Dick" Henry Durrance, Jr. (1914-2004) was an American ski racing pioneer, filmmaker, ski resort developer and promoter, and the first general manager of the Aspen Skiing Co. Born in Tarpon Springs, Florida, his family moved when he was 13 to Garmisch in the Bavarian Alps, where he learned progressive European ski racing techniques. Five years later, in 1932, he won the German Junior Alpine Championship. The following year his family moved back to Florida, and Durrance entered Dartmouth College in 1934. With a victory that same year at Sestriere, Italy, he became the first American to dominate at a major European ski race. Earning a place on the U.S. Olympic Team for the 1936 Winter Olympics, he placed eleventh in the downhill, eighth in the slalom, and tenth in the Olympic combined event. He continued to race for several more years, competing against the best talent from around the world. He was a three time winner of the Harriman Cup in Sun Valley- North America's largest ski race in the late 1930s. In total Durrance won 17 national championships. In 1939, after graduating from Dartmouth, Durrance moved to Sun Valley, Idaho, where he worked in the resort's public relations department. He cut the Warm Springs Trail on Mount Baldy and dabbled in his other passion, filmmaking. In 1940, he released his first films, Sun Valley Ski Chase and Sun Valley Holiday. He was named to the 1940 Olympic team, but those games were cancelled due to World War II. In 1940 he worked as publicity photographer for Sun Valley where he met and married ski racer Margaret "Miggs" Jennings. In 1941, the Durrances moved to Alta, Utah, where as the general manager and co-owner, Dick rebuilt the Alta Lodge and turned the fledgling area into a destination resort. In 1942, he used Alta's terrain in Little Cottonwood Canyon to train Army parachutists in the 10th Mountain Division. His first son, Dick Jr., was born the same year. In 1945, their second son, Dave, was born, and the family moved to Denver, where Durrance continued to make ski films while designing Groswold Skis. In 1947, after selling Aspen a T-bar ski lift, the Durrances settled in Aspen, and Dick became the resort's first general manager. Aspen acquired a larger reputation as a premier ski destination when he successfully brought in the 1950 FIS World Championship. He would go on to release a documentary of the event, which is still regarded as one of the most important, ground-breaking films in the ski industry. This event put Aspen on the map as one of the most popular American ski resorts. Over the years, Durrance became increasingly involved in filmmaking, shooting numerous travel, documentary and promotional films, including Frontiers, the film in this collection. He also wrote a book, Man on the Medal." Jean Oser(1908-2002) was an internationally known film editor, and Oscar-winning dramatic filmmaker. Born in Strasbourg (Alsace), Jean Oser grew up in Berlin with a passion for the moving image that would eventually lead to his collaboration with many of the world's legendary filmmakers. Intending to become a director, he apprenticed with Hans Richter and Walter Ruttman. In demand for his pioneering cutting techniques, he built his reputation as an editor for Austrian director G.W. Pabst and his cinema of social consciousness, working on such films as Westfront 1918 (1930), The Threepenny Opera (1931), and Kameradeschaft (1931). Leaving Germany in the early 1930s, Oser lived and worked in Paris, eventually immigrating to the United States after serving with the French army in Morocco. In the 1950s, he worked with such talents as Garson Kanin, Burgess Meredith, and Jean Renoir. His time spent at 20th Century Fox earned him an Academy Award in the Dramatic Short Film category for A Light in the Window(1953), an innovative profile of 17th century Dutch painter Johannes Vermeer. For the next thirty years, he was based in New York City, making industrial films, television features and series, documentaries, and travel films. In 1970, Oser came to Canada, having been invited to Regina to help establish a film school at the University. Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, he taught film history and aesthetics and inspired a generation of Saskatchewan filmmakers. A formative member of the University of Regina Department of Media Production and Studies, he became Professor Emeritus in 1990. In 1991, he received a Lifetime Award for Excellence in the Arts from the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Jean Oser died in Regina on February 20, 2002.
Historical Note The first land speed record set at the Bonneville Salt Flats was in 1914 by Teddy Tetzlaff at 142.8 miles per hour. Since that time, it has been used for racing because of its remarkable distinction as one of the largest flat areas in the world. Although the surface is not perfectly smooth, the total size makes it the premier place in the world to set top speed records. Each year, Bonneville Speed Week is held in the middle of August. All kinds of vehicles are raced at the Salt Flats, from small motorcycles to race cars, even normal cars.
Biographical Note Deedee Corradini was the first and to date only female mayor of Salt Lake City. She was instrumental in many important projects during her time as mayor (1992-2000) including but not limited to Salt Lake City's bid for the 2002 Winter Olympic Games, support of Trax public transportation in downtown, and the development of Gateway shopping center. She was also head of the US conference of mayors in 1998.
Biographical Note Joel Rosenberg graduated from the Julliard School of Music and received a Fulbright Grant to study in Rome. While studying in Italy he received a Certificate of Merit from the Accademia Musicale Chigiana in Siena. Current Music Director of Utah's Paradigm Chamber Orchestra and the American West Symphony in Sandy, UT, Rosenberg has conducted the Utah Opera as well as symphonies and ballets around the world, including orchestras in California, New Mexico, Oregon, Arizona, Australia and New Zealand.
Historical Note In autumn 1938 French kayakers Antoine DeSeynes and Bernard and Genegieve DeColmont undertook a kayak expedition from Green River, Wyoming to Lees Ferry, Arizona on the Green and Colorado Rivers.
Historical Note The men and women of the "The Greatest Generation" recollect the pivotal events of World War II in the landmark, Emmy Award-winning, four-part series from KUED. This collection is comprised of the oral histories that informed this series. Utah sent more than 70,000 troops to war – to the jungles of Asia, the mountains of Italy, the beaches of France, the air over Berlin, and the waters of the Pacific – to battle the forces of tyranny and reclaim freedom. More than 3,600 never returned to tell their stories. Those who did carry with them an unwavering sense of pride and unfailing humility about their service. At home, Utah citizens worked and sacrifices to help support the war effort, while anxiously waiting for the return of soldiers from distant combat.
Historical Note Released in 1965, Super 8mm film featured smaller sprocketholes than standard 8mm film, leaving more room on the 8mm film strip for the exposed image. The advent of Super 8 provided families and amateur film makers with a higher image quality than standard 8mm without saddling them with the size and cost of 16mm film. The Wilkinson family began documenting their activities in 1969, four years after the new format became available.
Biographical Note Dr. Willem Johan Kolff (1911-2009) has been an internationally-known name in the world of medicine since 1957 when he began working on the total artificial heart at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio. Known as the "Father of Artificial Organs", his pioneering spirit actually led him to make giant leaps in medicine long before he was so well-known. Born February 14, 1911, in Leyden, The Netherlands, Dr. Kolff went to the University of Groningen for his residency in medicine during the German occupation. He started working on the artificial kidney in 1939, and became the first internist at a small hospital in Kampen, where he continued the work on the artificial kidney. The rotating drum kidney was developed in 1941, and by 1955 the twin-coil kidney had led to the possibility of dialysis worldwide. Work on the heart-lung machines began in 1948, and the first membrane oxygenators were used successfully in patients in 1955. Dr. Kolff and his wife Janke had five children who were all born in the Netherlands. They immigrated to the United States in 1950. Here Dr. Kolff worked in the Research Department and the Department of Surgery of the Cleveland Clinicirca He worked on the artificial kidney, the heart lung machine, and invented the total artificial heart in 1957, one year after becoming a United States citizen. He became Scientific Director of Cleveland's Artificial Organ program, then moved to Utah in 1967 to direct the Division of Artificial Organs and the Institute for Biomedical Engineering at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. At the Division of Artificial Organs and the Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Dr. Kolff was in charge of teams working on artificial kidneys, artificial hearing, the artificial eye, artificial arm, the subcutaneous peritoneal access device, and the artificial heart. In 1982 Dr. Barney Clark received the first "permanent artificial heart" implanted in a human. This event made the University of Utah known throughout the world as the leader in artificial organ research. Dr. Kolff has received more than a hundred awards, among these the prestigious Japan Prize in 1986. He has published more than six hundred articles. He has been active in social issues such as abortion rights and nuclear weapon protests, and has always been interested in nature and art. He died February 11, 2009 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Historical Note In 1895, Marconi had the first succesful long distance radio transmission, spanning approximately 1.5 miles. As technology allowed radio to become a better communication and entertainment medium, it grew rapidly. By the 1940s, most households had a receiver and many commercially produced shows were available. Adaptations of written works, such as the "Children's Friend of the Air" programs in the Lois Lois Milner collection of broadcast radio audio recordings were common as well.
Historical Note The University of Utah Utes football team was founded in 1892. The team has won 12 of its 16 National Collegiate Athelitcs Association (NCAA) bowl games 1939-2010 and has played in the following conferences: 1910–1937: Rocky Mountain Athletic Conference 1938–1947: Big Seven Conference 1948–1961: Skyline Conference 1962–1998: Western Athletic Conference (WAC) 1999–2010: Mountain West Conference 2011– : Pacific-12 Conference (Pac-12)
Biographical Note Dr. Steve Lacy (b.1951) is a Utah historian and the author of books including Posey: The Last Indian War, Last of the Bandit Riders . . . Revisited and The Lynching of Robert Marshall, Last in the West. His photograph collection, donated to the Utah State Historical Society (Mss C 472), includes images of the Castle Gate mine disaster, which killed over 170 miners in three explosions March 8, 1924. Utah Governor Herbert B. Maw (1893-1990, Gov. 1941-1948) was born in Ogden, Utah to Emma Brown and Ephraim Goodman Maw, who later moved their family to Salt Lake City. After attending Latter Day Saint (LDS) High School and the University of Utah, Maw served in World War I as one of the army's first Mormon Chaplains. He married Florence Buehler in 1921. Having earned his J.D. degree at Northwestern University in 1927, Maw returned to the University of Utah to teach speech and political science from 1927-1940, and he served as Dean of Men from 1928-1936. In 1928, Maw was elected to the state senate where he served until 1938. He was president of that body from 1934-1938. One of the Utah Democratic Party's more liberal members, Maw promoted old-age assistance programs, government control of public utilities, and direct primary elections. He won the Democratic Party's gubernatorial nomination in 1940 in the state's first primary election of that kind and went on to defeat his conservative opponent, Don B. Colton to become Utah's eighth governor. As governor of the state of Utah, Maw reorganized various commissions, bureaus and boards under the somewhat controversial Publicity Industrial Department (PID) to promote tourism and new business. The PID built roads to scenic attractions in Southern Utah and built a natural history museum in Vernal. Maw's administration also built the "This is the Place Monument" at the mouth of Emigration Canyon. While governor, Maw supported a major highway building program and approved the creation of a state water and power board to oversee the use of Colorado River water within the state. During World War II, he successfully attracted military and other war related industries to Utah, creating many jobs and reviving the state's economy. Herbert Maw was defeated in the 1948 gubernatorial election by Republican J. Bracken Lee. After his term as governor, he ran a private law practice until well into his 90s. He died in 1993.
Biographical Note Joseph "Joe" Desloge (1889-1971) was born in St. Louis, Missouri to Lydia Davis and Firmin Vincent Desloge, who had moved to St. Louis to attend St. Louis University. A descendant of French immigrants, Joseph Desloge served in the French army in WWI and was decorated for bravery near Vouziers. He graduated from the Massachusettes Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1912 with a degree in electrical engineering and founded the Minerva Oil Company (miners of zinc and fluorspar), Killark Electric Manufacturing Company, Louisiana Manufacturing Company and Atlas Manufacturing Company. In 1946, built an elegant mansion in Florissant, Missouri, whcih he named "Vouziers" after the site of his glory in France. A frequent vacationer on the Colorado River, Desloge used his wealth to preserve and share natural landscapes in his home state by donating the land to create Johnson's Shut-Ins State Park in Reynold County, Missouri and Sunset Park in the city of Florissant. Desloge and his first wife, Anne Kennett Farrar, had four children. She died in 1934, and Desloge spent his later years with Anna Margaret Saalfrank, whom he married in 1953. Joseph Desloge passed away in 1971.
Biographical Note Alton Crane Melville (1904-1966) was an avid skier who once served as president of the National Ski Association (NSA), an organization now known as the United States Ski and Snowboard Association (USSA). His son, Marvin Melville (b. 1935), is an internationally decorated and respected skier. He skied for the Granite High School, University of Utah, 1958 United States Olympic Alpine, and 1960 International Ski Federation (FIS) ski teams. In 1959, Marvin Melville became the National Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) champion in downhill, slalom and combined ski events. After retiring from competition, he served a tour in the Army and then opened a ski school for young racers. Melville coached the 1964 Women's Olympic Ski Team and the University of Utah Ski Team. He was inducted into the Sports Hall of Fame in 1990.
Biographical Note Orange A. Olsen was born October 10, 1890 with a twin named Henning. Both were named after their grandfathers, Utah pioneers Orange Seely and Henning Olsen. Their parents Abenadi and Hannah Seely Olsen raised them on a farm. Olsen attended three years of high school in the Emery Stake Academy and, from 1910 to 1912, served as a missionary for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints LDS mission in Germany, Switzerland, and Austria. Afterwards, he worked as a clerk in the Castle Dale Cooperative store (2 years), then as a bookkeeper for the Consolidated Wagon and Machine Company. He married Aileen Brown of Salt Lake City in 1915 and took a correspondence course in law. Olsen began work with the Forest Service in November 1917 as a clerk in the Manti Supervisor’s Office in Ephraim. He was the Mammoth District Ranger (near Fairview) on the Manti from 1918 until 1922 when he became deputy forest supervisor. His next appointments were as forest supervisor of the Lemhi (1922-23), La Sal (1923-26), and Dixie (1926-31) national forests. In 1931, Olsen transferred to Region 4’s regional office in Ogden, Utah to head up the wildlife division. In order to regulate big game hunting and fishing activities in his region, he began conducting the annual wildlife census via aircraft. He was considered a pioneer in developing this new technique of the big game census. Unfortunately, he died in 1945 in an airplane crash while conducting an aerial count of elk in the Bridger National Forest. Olsen was known for always carrying a videocamera with him. This audio visual collection consists of 16mm film clips of various Forest Service footage taken by Olsen during his time working for the Forest Service.
Biographical Note James Taylor Harwood (1860-1940) was born in Lehi, Utah. His father was a saddle and harness maker. Harwood began drawing as a child, making pictures of animals and portraits of his schoolmates. In his boyhood, he formed lifelong friendships with artists John Hafen and Cyrus E. Dallin. In his teens, Harwood carried mail and worked in his father's shop to earn enough money to go to art school. At the age of 25, he entered the San Francisco School of Design. At the end of one year, he won a gold medal for the best painting of the year. In 1886, he returned to Utah, opened a studio, and taught art. Two years later he had saved enough money to go to France and enter the Ecole des Beaux Arts. From 1891 to 1893 he studied at the Academie Julian in Paris where he won a medal for painting. In 1891, Harwood married one of his art students, Harriet Richards. They settled in Salt Lake City, after their sojourn in France, where he taught at East and West high schools. They had five children. During the next twenty-five years, the Harwoods divided their time between France and Utah. In 1920, the family moved to California due to Harriet's poor health. She died in 1922 and the family returned to Salt Lake City. Harwood became head of the art department at the University of Utah in 1922. He held that position until 1931, when he resigned in order to devote more time to his painting. At the university, he taught the first class in color etching ever given in the United States. In 1929, Harwood married Ione Godwin. They traveled to Europe for two years where Harwood developed his impressionist painting technique. He became famous in Europe as well as in the United States and won many honors for his works. The Harwoods returned to California in 1939 with their two children, Jim and Lark. In 1940, the University of Utah assembled the James Taylor Harwood art exhibition. This exhibit was in honor of his 80th birthday and represented his life's work. He died in Salt Lake City on 16 October 1940. Ione Harwood passed away at the age of 96 in November 2003. Lark succumbed to cancer in October 1998. From Jim Harwood: During the period of their marriage, "Ione was usually with [her husband] on his excursions searching for subject matter and would be nearby as he worked at his easel or drawing pad. Some of his works included Ione in the distance relaxing on a blanket or just on the grass within the scene, usually reading a book while he worked . . . children were sometimes there also." Harwood "didn't creat the finished work in the field. He would make sketches, notes, and sometimes take photos for use back in the studio, where conditions were controllable and amenable for hours spent at the easel."
Organizational History Founded in 1930, the Japanese American Citizens League (JACL) is a membership organization whose mission is to secure and maintain the human and civil rights of Americans of Japanese ancestry and others victimized by injustice. The JACL has 112 chapters nationwide and eight regional districts with over 24,000 members found in 23 states. In addition to its national headquarters in San Francisco, the JACL has five regional offices (Los Angeles, Fresno, San Francisco, Seattle, Chicago), as well as an office in Washington D.C. and an organizational newspaper, the Pacific Citizen, distributed nationally from its office in Los Angeles. According to its official website, www.jacl.org, the JACL derives its effectiveness through its regional offices located in key cities and areas to serve the needs of the organization's members and to maintain the well-being of all Asian Americans.
Historical Note The Topaz War Relocation Center (11 September 1945-31 October 1945) was the fifth largest city in Utah during World War II, when it was home to over 9,000 Japanese-Americans and Japanese immigrants, who were relocated from the West Coast of the United States of America as a result of Executive Order 9066. Relocated from California's Bay Area, Dave M. Tatsuno recorded his experiences in the camp in moving images. All footage was shot in secret as neither moving image nor still cameras were allowed in any of the Japanese-American internment camps. In fact, evacuees were required to turn in all cameras to the War Department once the war began. Tatsuno, rather than give up his camera to the authorities, loaned it to a Caucasian friend who lived in Oakland, California for the duration of the war. After he was sent to Topaz, Tatsuno mentioned to a camp employee that he wished he had a camera to document life in camp. The worker offered to have Tatsuno's camera sent to himself and agreed to give Tatsuno the camera once it arrived at the camp. Tatsuno was a young, married man at the time he was sent to Topaz. He and his wife had a son who was still a toddler and Tatsuno's wife gave birth to their daughter while in camp.
Organizational History In 1964, History professors A. R. Mortensen and Gregory Crampton conceived the University of Utah's American West Center (originally called the Western History Center) as an institution devoted exclusively to research on the American West. As a part of its mission to create and disseminate knowledge about the American West, the center established the ongoing Ethnic Oral Histories Project to explore the experiences of Utah members of Native American and ethnic immigrant communities, including the Jewish community.
